CITATION: 1853491 Ont. Inc. et al v. Reg. Waste N. Inc. et al, 2017 ONSC 3157
NEWMARKET COURT FILE NO.: CV-14-118210/00
DATE: 20170523

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

1853491 Ontario Inc. and 2278385 Ontario
Limited, operating as Kirby Waste Transfer
Solutions
Plaintiffs )
-and)
Regional Waste North Inc. and Alex Sivitilli )
Defendants
-AND)
Regional Waste Transit Inc, Alex Sivitilli,
Regional Waste Transit Inc. and Snowpro
Winter Services Ltd.
Plaintiffs by Counterclaim
-and)
1853491 Ontario Inc., 2278385 Ontario Inc.
c.o.b. as Kirby Waste Transfer Solutions,
1854488 Ontario Limited Vincenzo Ussia
Senior, Vincenzo Ussia Junior, Michael
Ussia, Lucia Ussia, 1116941 Ontario
Limited, Verde Excavating Ltd., A1A
Demolition Inc., and Public Disposal and
Recycling Inc.
Defendants by Counterclaim
WOODLEY, J.

M. Marchioni, for the Plaintiffs/Defendantsby Counterclaim

M. Kestenberg and B. Jusko, for theDefendants/Plaintiffs by Counterclaim

Heard May 11, 2017

ORDER
Nature of the Motion1. The sole issue before me on this motion is whether the Plaintiffs should be granted leaveunder Rule 39.02(2) to file a Supplementary Affidavit, dated January 23, 2017, and ifleave is granted, to determine the terms that would be just in the circumstances of thiscase.

ONTARIO

2

2. The Plaintiffs’ Claim and the Defendants’ Counter-claim arise as a result of a failedbusiness relationship between the Ussia Family (the Plaintiffs) and the defendant AlexSivitilli (the Defendants).
3. In general terms the following is a summary of the dispute between the parties and thelitigation arising therefrom:
a. In 2011, the Plaintiffs entered into a business agreement with the Defendants.
b. In late 2013, the business relationship between the parties deteriorated.
c. In early January 2014, the Plaintiffs requested that the Defendants vacate thePlaintiffs’ property (Kirby Waste). Around this same time, the Defendantsasserted an ownership interest in that same company (Kirby Waste).
d. On January 14, 2014, the Plaintiffs sent an email to the Defendants denying theDefendants’ ownership claims in Kirby Waste.
e. On January 22, 2014, the Plaintiffs’ counsel and the Defendants’ former counselmet to address the parties’ claims. The parties agreed to consult with KirbyWaste’s corporate accountant and corporate lawyer to determine the Defendants’
claims of beneficial ownership.
f.

On March 20, 2014, after being unable to resolve their issues, the Plaintiffscommenced the within action by Statement of Claim.

g. On June 16, 2014, the Defendants filed a Statement of Defence to the Claim.
h. On March 3, 2016, the Defendants filed a Fresh as Amended Statement ofDefence and Counterclaim. Among other matters, by their amended pleadings theDefendants as Plaintiffs by Counterclaim seek: (i) a declaration that Mr. Sivitilliis a beneficial owner of Kirby Waste; and (ii) payment for landscaping work donein 2012 and 2013.
i.

On April 29, 2016, the Plaintiffs filed a Motion Record seeking partial summaryjudgment claiming that the Defendants’ Counterclaim is statute-barred.

j.

In response to the Plaintiffs’ Motion for summary judgment, the Defendantsserved an Affidavit and a Supplementary Affidavit sworn by Mr. Sivitilli. By theSupplementary Affidavit, delivered November 18, 2016, the Defendants recitedetails of the parties’ agreement to verify Kirby Waste’s ownership structure andinclude some of the communication exchanged relating to this agreement.

Overview of Dispute and Litigation

3

l.

Also on December 16, 2016, following the cross-examination of Mr. Sivitilli, thePlaintiffs learned for the first time that the Defendants intend to rely on s. 11 andthe tolling provisions of the Limitations Act as a defence to the Plaintiffs’ Motionfor Summary Judgment.

m. On January 23, 2017, the Plaintiffs filed an Amended Notice of Motion seekingleave to admit additional affidavit evidence under r. 39.02(2) of the Rules of CivilProcedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, on such terms as are just.
THE LAW

4.

Rule 39.02(2) of the Rules of Civil Procedure reads as follows:
39.02 (2) A party who has cross-examined on an affidavitdelivered by an adverse party shall not subsequently deliver anaffidavit for use at the hearing or conduct an examination underrule 39.03 without leave or consent, and the court shall grant leave,on such terms as are just, where it is satisfied that the party oughtto be permitted to respond to any matter raised on the crossexamination with evidence in the form of an affidavit or atranscript of an examination conducted under rule 39.03. R.R.O.
1990, Reg. 194, r. 39.02 (2).

5.
The Plaintiffs argue that a flexible, contextual approach is to be taken inassessing whether to admit new evidence under r. 39.02(2), citing the DivisionalCourt’s decision in First Capital Realty Inc. v. Centrecorp Management ServicesLtd., 2009 CarswellOnt 6914, at para. 14, (Ont. S.C. [Div. Ct.]).
6.7.
Both sides, however, agree that whether to grant leave on a r. 39.02(2)
motion is determined by a consideration of the following criteria:
1. Is the evidence relevant?
2. Does the evidence respond to a matter raised on the cross-examination, not necessarilyraised for the first time?

k. On December 16, 2016, the Plaintiffs conducted their cross-examination of Mr.Sivitilli with respect to the affidavits filed on the Plaintiffs’ Motion. Plaintiffs’
counsel did not seek to cross-examine Mr. Sivitilli with respect to theSupplementary Affidavit delivered November 18, 2016.

4

4. Did the moving party provide a reasonable or adequate explanation for why the evidencewas not included at the outset?
8.
The Plaintiffs contend that each factor supports granting leave, while the Defendantsconcede only the first factor, relevancy.
Review of the Four Factors to Consider When Asked to Grant Leave9.
As relevancy is conceded, we begin with the second factor - does the evidence respond toa matter raised on the cross-examination, not necessarily raised for the first time?
10.
The Defendants submit that the matters for which they seek to file further evidence werenot raised on cross-examination but rather were contained in the affidavit of Mr. Marchioni filedby the Plaintiffs in support of their Motion for Summary Judgment and by the Defendants in theSupplementary Affidavit of Mr. Sivitilli delivered November 18, 2016.
11.
The Plaintiffs deny the Defendants’ submission and assert that the Defendants did notallude to the tolling issues until Mr. Sivitilli mentioned them following cross-examination at theprompting of his counsel on re-examination and did not allude to the s. 11 issues until followingthe completion of the cross-examination.
12.
On my review of this second factor, I note that the test from the First Capital Realty Inc.
v. Centrecorp Management Services Ltd., 2009 CarswellOnt 6914, does not strictly require thatthe matter was raised for the first time on cross-examination. In the present case it is clear thatthe Plaintiffs’ were unaware that the matters for which they seek to file further evidence werematters in dispute until following the cross-examination of Mr. Sivitilli. In the circumstances I
find that the Plaintiffs were completely unaware that the matters in issue were disputed and thisis sufficient to satisfy the second factor.
13.
The third factor - would granting leave to file the evidence result in non-compensableprejudice that could not be addressed by imposing costs, terms, or an adjournment – is easilyanswered.
14.
Non-compensable delay is not a factor in this case. The bulk of the delay to date can beattributed to the Defendants and any delay caused by leave being granted will be minimal.
15.
The Defendants further argue that admitting the affidavit would give the plaintiffs theopportunity to split their case, thereby prejudicing the defendants/plaintiffs by counterclaim. I donot accept this argument as the proposed affidavit seeks to respond to issues admittedly alreadyraised by the Defendants – it does not seek to raise new issues. In the circumstances there is noprejudice that would arise from leave being granted.

3. Would granting leave to file the evidence result in non-compensable prejudice that couldnot be addressed by imposing costs, terms, or an adjournment?

5

17.
The Plaintiffs argue that prior to the completion of the cross-examinations they did notunderstand that the Defendants intended to rely upon s. 11 of the Limitations Act or any tollingagreement. The Plaintiffs note that the Defendants did not plead the Limitations Act in theirDefendants’ Fresh as Amended Statement of Defence and Counterclaim. The Plaintiffs advisethat they were taken by surprise when advised of the Defendants’ position following the crossexamination.
18.
The Defendants submit that Mr. Sivitill’s Supplementary Affidavit clearly sets out theDefendants’ position that the limitation period had been extended by virtue of the partiesagreeing to consult with the accountant and corporate lawyer. The Defendants further submit thatit is not necessary for them to specifically plead the Limitations Act to rely upon the provisionsof the Act.
19.
Notwithstanding this argument, the Defendants’ very candidly and properly informed thecourt that the Defendants were aware that the Plaintiffs’ had “missed” the s. 11 and tollingissues. Further, although the Defendants’ position with respect to the evidence filed on theMotion for Summary Judgment was strategic - it was also entirely permissible by the Rules ofCivil Procedure. The Defendants argue that (i) the Rules exist for a purpose; (ii) it is goodadvocacy to employ litigation strategy where permissible; and (iii) a “lawsuit is not a tea party”.
20.
I greatly appreciate the Defendants’ candor in this regard. I accept the Defendants’
submission that a “lawsuit is not a tea party” and that good advocacy requires thoughtfullitigation strategy. I also agree that lawyers should be encouraged to develop a fulsome view ofthe litigation and develop a litigation plan or strategy according.
21.
However, in the present case I am not persuaded that strategic advocacy which utilizespermissible applications of the Rules outweighs the general principle that the Rules shall beliberally construed to secure the just, most expeditious and least expensive determination ofevery civil proceeding on its merits.
22.
Had argument on the motion for summary judgment already commenced, I may havereached a different conclusion. However, in the present case the parties have not begun argumentof the Motion for Summary Judgment which Motion may fully and finally determine the tollingand s. 11 issues under the Limitations Act between the parties on a final basis without thenecessity of a trial.
23.
In the circumstances I find that leave should be granted in accordance with Rule 39.02(2)
and Rule 1.04 (1) on the following terms:
a. The Plaintiffs shall be entitled to file the proposed Supplementary Affidavit ofMr. Ussia for use on the Motion for Summary Judgment;

16.
The fourth factor - did the moving party provide a reasonable or adequate explanation forwhy the evidence was not included at the outset – is somewhat more complicated.

b. The Defendants shall be entitled to cross-examine all affiants on all affidavitsfiled by the Plaintiffs in support of the Motion for Summary Judgment, includingthe affiant of the Supplementary Affidavit for which leave is granted;c. No further affidavits or evidence shall be filed with respect to the Motion forSummary Judgment except on consent or as may be further ordered; andd. The parties shall jointly contact the trial coordinator to schedule a date forargument of the Motion for summary judgment before any available judge. I amnot seized of this matter.
24.
The parties have agreed that the costs of the motion for leave argued before me shall bereserved to the judge hearing the Motion for Summary Judgment.

Justice S.J. WoodleyReleased: May 23, 2017

6

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
1853491 Ontario Inc. and 2278385 Ontario Limited,operating as Kirby Waste Transfer SolutionsPlaintiffs
– and –
Regional Waste North Inc. and Alex Sivitilli,Defendants
-andRegional Waste Transit Inc, Alex Sivitilli, RegionalWaste Transit Inc. and Snowpro Winter Services Ltd.
Plaintiffs by Counterclaim
-and1853491 Ontario Inc., 2278385 Ontario Inc. c.o.b. asKirby Waste Transfer Solutions, 1854488 OntarioLimited Vincenzo Ussia Senior, Vincenzo Ussia Junior,Michael Ussia, Lucia Ussia, 1116941 Ontario Limited,Verde Excavating Ltd., A1A Demolition Inc., andPublic Disposal and Recycling Inc.
Defendants by CounterclaimREASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Woodley, J

CITATION: 1853491 Ont. Inc. et al v. Reg. Waste North Inc. et al, 2017 ONSC 3157
NEWMARKET COURT FILE NO.: CV-14-118210/00
DATE: 20170523

2

Released: May 23, 2017

