CITATION: ANDREEVSKAIA v. SATANOVSKI and TERESHCHENKO 2017 ONSC 2885
COURT FILE NO.: CV-16-1244
DATE: 20170510

RE:

TATIANA ANDREEVSKAIA, Plaintiff/Moving PartyAND:
VITALI SATANOVSKI and LYUDMYLA TERESHCHENKO,Defendants/Respondents

BEFORE:

THE HONOURABLE MADAM JUSTICE VALLEE

COUNSEL: A. Pyne-Hilton, Counsel, for the Plaintiff/Moving PartyA. Rogerson and A. Jazayeri, Counsel, for the Defendants/RespondentsHEARD:

May 9, 2017
ENDORSEMENT

[1]

The plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment was heard yesterday. The plaintiff statedthat the defendants had raised in their factum certain legal issues that were not pleaded.
The plaintiff wished to file a supplementary book of authorities containing cases relevantto these legal issues. This book of authorities was provided to the defendants at thecommencement of the motion.

[2]

The defendants stated that if the court were to receive the supplementary book ofauthorities, they ought to be permitted to make written submissions regarding the cases inthe book of authorities after the conclusion of the motion.

[3]

The defendants’ factum does appear to raise legal issues that were not pleaded. Thedefendants served their factum on May 2, 2017, four business days prior to the motion.
This put the plaintiff in an awkward position. The plaintiff’s position was that thedefendants should not be permitted to raise these issues. Nevertheless, the plaintiff wasprepared to argue them.

[4]

I accepted the plaintiff’s supplementary book of authorities and heard submissions fromboth parties on these issues.

[5]

Because the defendants did not have an opportunity to review the cases in the book ofauthorities, the defendants are permitted to serve and file written submissions on only thecases in the plaintiff’s supplementary book of authorities within ten days. The plaintiff ispermitted to serve and file written reply submissions within a further ten days. The text

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

of the submissions shall be no longer than five pages with 1.5 spacing, regular marginsand 12 point font.
The submissions shall be filed with the Barrie trial coordinator to my attention.

VALLEE J.

Date: May 10, 2017

[6]

