SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

RE:

KATHRYN ALEXANDRA ARMSTRONG v. ROBERT BRYAN HICKS

BEFORE:

LEMAY J.

COUNSEL: J. Byrne, Counsel for the ApplicantE. Cohen, Counsel for the RespondentHEARD:

May 26th, 2017

ENDORSEMENT

[1]

Dr. Bryan Hicks is a veterinarian specializing in the care of large animals.

Dr. Kathryn Armstrong is a veterinarian specializing in the care of small animals.
They were in a common-law relationship for a period of 22 years, but were nevermarried.

[2]

They ran a number of veterinary businesses, and were also involved in a

fitness business. However, their relationship ended in the early summer of 2015.
Since that time, there have been ongoing corporate and family law proceedings,including a failed attempt at collaborative mediation in the fall of 2015.

CITATION: Armstrong v. Hicks, 2017 ONSC 3329
COURT FILE NOs.: 20/16 and 39/16
DATE: 05 30 2017

-2Ultimately, a mediated settlement was reached on May 27th, 2016 and

outlined in a consent Order. This agreement required Dr. Hicks to obtainfinancing to buy out the interests of Dr. Armstrong in the businesses andproperties. Dr. Hicks has spent the last year working on obtaining financing, andI understand that he has obtained it and that the transaction will close once thisdecision is released.

[4]

There are two issues that have arisen between the parties since the

agreement was signed in 2016.

First, Dr. Hicks alleges that Dr. Armstrong did

not disclose to him all of the debts of the businesses that she incurred prior to theagreement being reached.

As a result, Dr. Hicks is seeking a reduction in the

amounts he is to pay Dr. Armstrong on the basis of this non-disclosure. Second,Dr. Armstrong is alleging that Dr. Hicks should have obtained financing earlier.
As a result, she is claiming that interest, damages and costs should be added tothe amounts owing to her by Dr. Hicks.

[5]

For the reasons that follow, I would not make any of the adjustments

sought by either Dr. Hicks or Dr. Armstrong, except that Dr. Armstrong is to bepaid interest on the amounts owing to her in accordance with the terms of theconsent Order.

[3]

-3-

Backgrounda)

[6]

The Businesses

Dr. Hicks is a large animal veterinarian.

veterinarian.

Dr. Armstrong is a small animal

During the course of their relationship, each focused on providing

clients with services relating to their own specialties.

[7]

The parties ran two main veterinary clinics, the Arthur Veterinary Clinic and

the North Wellington Animal Hospital.

Both clinics were run by professional

corporations, and there was a third company, the Arthur Veterinary ClinicIncorporated, that owned some of the parties’ real estate. In addition, the partiesowned some real estate personally.

[8]

In the last few years of the parties’ relationship, Dr. Armstrong also ran a

gym business.

That business, which was owned by both parties, and by a third

party, Shawn MacKenzie, lost significant amounts of money.
parties found themselves in some financial difficulties.

As a result, the

-4-

The parties had considerable indebtedness to the Royal Bank of CanadaThe parties separated effective July 31st, 2015. They continued to run

(“RBC”).

their businesses together for a period of time.

[10]

However, in November of 2015, Dr. Hicks started to run the large animal

practice more separately from the small animal practice, and Dr. Armstrong setup a separate bank account for receipts from her portion of the veterinarybusiness.

It is not clear to me precisely what happened, but I do not need to

resolve these factual issues in order to resolve the questions on this motion.

[11]

It is, however, clear that RBC was concerned about its security, and took

steps to monitor the affairs of the various companies.
enforce its security in the spring of 2016.

RBC also took steps to

However, RBC has signed various

forebearance agreements with the parties, and has not yet brought proceedingsto enforce its security.

I understand that the refinancing obtained by Dr. Hicks

will result in RBC being fully paid.
b) The Procedure and the Settlement

[12]

As a result of the financial problems, and the failure to reach an

agreement through collaborative mediation, the parties commenced variousactions.

Dr. Armstrong commenced a family law proceeding, and Dr. Hicks

[9]

-5-

by

commencing

an

application

under

the oppression remedy

provisions of the Ontario Business Corporations Act.

[13]

These matters originally came before Van Melle J. on March 21st, 2016,

who requested that Daley R.S.J. appoint a case management judge.

Van Melle

J. also issued an interim Order on consent, outlining details of the operation ofthe veterinary clinics.

I was appointed the case management judge for both

actions, and conducted a case conference with the parties.
interim Order dated April 27th, 2016.

This resulted in an

I then conducted an all-day settlement

conference with the parties on May 27th, 2016. The parties reached final minutesof settlement that day.

[14]

Dr. Hicks agreed to buy out Dr. Armstrong’s interests in the businesses,

as well as paying monthly spousal support for a period of just over three years.
The buyout was scheduled to happen on the earlier of sixty (60) days after May27th, 2016 or when financing took place. The buyout has not yet happened, butis scheduled to happen when the transaction closes later this week.
c)

[15]

Events Since the Settlement

Dr. Hicks has spent a great deal of time working on obtaining financing

for this transaction.

In the meantime, he has continued to make the monthly

responded

-6-

the debt currently owed to RBC.

[16]

In December of last year, Dr. Hicks raised the issues of whether certain

expenses that he had discovered should be deducted from the amounts owing toDr. Armstrong. In particular, these expenses were:
a)

Unremitted HST in the sum of $47,097.77

b)

Invoices for snow clearing services in the sum of $6,102.00

c)

Advertising invoices for Booster Magazine in the sum of $3,039.87.

d)

Bad and/or uncollectable debts from Spoil Me Pets in the amount of
$26,989.64.

[17]

Dr. Hicks also made a claim for the accounting costs he incurred in

sorting out the businesses affairs, as well as for legal fees associated with thedelay in completing the transaction.

[18]

Given the delay in arranging the financing, and paying out her settlement

funds,

Dr.

Specifically,

ArmstrongDr.

sought

the

payment

of

interest

and

legal costs.

Armstrong seeks interest in the sum of $2,870.98 and

unnecessary legal fees in the sum of $10,354.19.

support payments that were set out as part of the agreement as well as servicing

-7-

As a result of these issues, counsel asked the Court to interpret the

agreement that had been reached and address these outstanding issues.

I

reminded counsel that I had been the judge at the settlement conferences onboth April 27th, 2016 and May 27th, 2016. Both counsel confirmed in writing thatthey were content to have me address these outstanding issues.

[20]

Both counsel also agreed to an expedited process to resolve these

issues. As part of that process, each side could file up to two (2) Affidavits fromtwo different witnesses.

Reply Affidavits were also permitted.

The parties were

then permitted fifteen (15) minutes of examination in chief of each affiant tosupplement their affidavits, and the other side was permitted an hour crossexamination of each affiant.

[21]

I received an Affidavit and a reply Affidavit from each of the principals. In

addition, Dr. Hicks relied on two previous Affidavits that he had filed with theCourt, an Affidavit from Trevor Seip.

Mr. Seip was the bookkeeper who was

brought in by Dr. Hicks after April of 2016 in order to put the records of thevarious corporations in order.

[22]

In addition, at the hearing on May 26th, 2017, I had both of the parties

confirm on the record that they were content to have me address the outstandinglegal issues in a decision in spite of the fact that I had been the settlement

[19]

-8-

They both also confirmed that they obtained legal advice on

this issue although that advice was, of course, not disclosed.

[23]

Finally, counsel advised me that financing is now in place, and that this

transaction can close. It is, in fact, scheduled to close later this week. Counselalso advised me that, for technical reasons relating to the structuring of thetransaction, a decision outlining the precise amount that Dr. Hicks owes Dr.Armstrong is required before the transaction can be completed, which is why thisdecision is being issued so quickly.

I will now turn to resolving the issues that

present themselves.
Issues

[24]

The claims that Dr. Hicks and Dr. Armstrong have made in this motion

reveal two issues:
a) Did Dr. Armstrong breach the parties agreement by notdisclosing various debts?
b) Should Dr. Armstrong be entitled to damages for breach ofcontract as a result of the failure of Dr. Hicks to obtainfinancing, and pay the monies owing?

conference judge.

-9-

Various Debts?

[25]

The interpretation of a Court Order should be approached in a contextual

manner, which a view to achieving the Order’s objective (see Boily v. CarletonCondominium Corporation 2014 ONCA 574).

Each word must be given

meaning, and the document must be read as a whole

[26]

Dr. Hicks asserts that none of the debts described in paragraph 16,

above, were disclosed to him by Dr. Armstrong. Dr. Hicks argues that this nondisclosure on the part of Dr. Armstrong triggers paragraph 18 of the minutes ofsettlement, and results in Dr. Armstrong being liable for these non-discloseddebts.

[27]

Determining whether Dr. Armstrong is liable to pay these debts requires

consideration of the precise wording of thre provisions in the May 27th, 2016
Consent Order. Paragraphs 10, 11, 12 and 18 of that Order read as follows:
10. The Respondent Robert Bryan Hicks shall assume full responsibility for allaccounts payable for any of Arthur Veterinary Clinic Inc. (“AVCI”), ArthurVeterinary Professional Corporation (“AVCProCO”), North Wellington AnimalHospital (“NWAH”), and 2233840 Ontario Inc, (“223”), which accounts includebut are not limited to:
(a) any Veterinary Purchasing invoices, including the account opened by theApplicant Kathryn Alexandra Armstrong when she operated the business;
(b) any amounts owing to Ward and Uptigrove; or

Issue #1- Did Dr. Armstrong Breach the Agreement By Not Disclosing

- 10 -

(c) any wages, benefits, or vacation pay owed to any employee.
11. For greater certainty, if any accounts are in the name of the ApplicantKathryn Alexandra Armstrong, but were for business related items for AVCI,AVCProCO, NWAH, and 223, the Respondent Robert Bryan Hicks shall beresponsible for these as well.
12. The Respondent Robert Bryan Hicks shall provide to the Applicant KathrynAlexandra Armstrong a complete release or indemnity in relation to any moniesowed by AVCI, AVCIProCo, NWAH, and 223, save and except any leaseobligations entered into by the Applicant Kathryn Alexandra Armstrong on apersonal capacity with respect to 223, in a form approved by counsel, includingany debts associated with:
(a) corporate taxes owing;
(b) property taxes owing; or
(c) HST or source deductions owing.
…
18. To be clear, This Order is meant to be a comprehensive resolution of alloutstanding issues between the Respondent Robert Bryan Hicks and theApplicant Kathryn Alexandra Armstrong, and neither will have any course ofaction as against the other in relation to these matters If it is discovered afterthese Minutes are signed that a further non-disclosed liability attaches to theApplicant Kathryn Alexandra Armstrong, which is related to the AVCI,AVCProCo, NWAH, or 223, it is understood that the Respondent Robert BryanHicks is not to assume responsibility for same, subject to paragraphs 10 and 11
herein.

[28]

In my view, a review of those paragraphs demonstrates a number of

points.

First, I note that paragraph 12 makes specific mention of HST.

As a

result, it is clear from the parties’ agreement that they were both aware that therewould be some HST outstanding at the time the transaction closed.

[29]

Second, I note that Dr. Hicks had been in control of the businesses for

approximately a month at the time that the May 27th, 2016 Order was agreed to.

- 11 -

control of Dr. Hicks would have shown whether HST had been paid from thoseaccounts or not. As a result, it would have been open for Dr. Hicks to ascertainthat there was a significant amount of HST that had been unpaid.

[30]

Third, paragraph 18 states that Dr. Hicks is not to assume responsibility

for any non-disclosed liabilities that attach personally to Dr. Armstrong. Dr. Hicksargues that this paragraph clearly indicates that, since the specific amount ofHST owing was not disclosed, this clause permits him to claim indemnity for thatHST from Dr. Armstrong.

I disagree because the words “non-disclosed liability”

do not speak to the amount of a liability. Instead, these words speak to types ofliabilities.

The fact that HST was owing was clearly within the contemplation of

Dr. Hicks when he agreed to the May 27th, 2016 Order, and it was a type ofliability that had been disclosed to him prior to the minutes of settlement beingexecuted.

This provision does not allow him to seek indemnity for these

amounts. Dr. Hicks’s claim for HST is dismissed.

[31]

The claims for snowplowing and for advertising can be dealt with

together.

Paragraph 10 of the consent Order clearly states that Dr. Hicks will

become responsible for all of the accounts payable for all of the businesses.

In testimony, Mr. Seip confirmed that a review of the records that were in the

- 12 -

payable for the businesses.

[32]

The proper, contextual, way to read paragraphs 10, 12 and 18 of the

Order is to read them as addressing different types of debts and obligations.
Paragraph 10 addresses the accounts payable of the businesses. Paragraph 18
addresses any undisclosed obligations that may attract personal liability.

The

accounts payable for snowplowing and for advertising do not attract personalliability and are covered by paragraph 10 of the agreement.

As a result, Dr.

Hicks is not entitled to a deduction for these amounts even if they were notdisclosed, as they are simply accounts payable of the businesses.

[33]

I am supported in this conclusion by the fact that paragraph 18 clearly

states that the ability of Dr. Hicks to avoid responsibility for personal debtsaccruing to Dr. Armstrong is subject to paragraphs 10 and 11. This suggests thatany conflict between the two provisions should be resolved by giving precedenceto paragraph 10.

This appears to fit the context of the transaction, which is that

Dr. Hicks was obtaining both the benefits and the liabilities of the businesses. Itwould require clear wording for Dr. Hicks to be able to avoid one the businesses’
liabilities, and such wording is not contained in paragraph 18.

There is no limitation on Dr. Hicks’s responsibilities in regards to accounts

- 13 -

This brings me to the question of the bad/uncollectable debt from Spoil

Me Pets, which was a business owned by Dr. Armstrong’s sister. I alsounderstand that Dr. Armstrong had some involvement in this business.

This is

not an account payable or a debt, so it is not covered by any of the provisions setout above.

Indeed, the agreement is silent about what happens to uncollectable

accounts receivable.

[35]

When the order is considered as a whole, however, the answer is clear.

The purpose behind this Order was to transfer the businesses to Dr. Hicks sothat he could attempt to make a going concern of them. All of the profit that maycome from that transfer from May 27th, 2016 is his to keep.

Conversely, Dr.

Hicks bears the responsibility for the losses unless the agreement between theparties specifically modifies that intention. Since the agreement is silent, it mustbe presumed that Dr. Hicks will bear the responsibility for this bad debt if he hasno legal way to enforce payment of it outside of these proceedings.

[36]

I also note that paragraph 18 speaks to undisclosed liabilities.

This was

not a liability. It is, potentially, an asset of the business if it can be realized upon.

[37]

This brings me to Dr. Hicks’s claim for damages as a result of accounting

fees that he has spent in bringing the corporations books and accounts into good

[34]

- 14 -

address it in the next section.
Issue #2- Is Dr. Armstrong Entitled to Damages because the Agreement hasnot yet Closed?

[38]

Dr. Armstrong is seeking compensation for legal costs incurred as a

result of the delay in paying out the sums owing to her under the agreement, aswell as other expenses and interest. Dr. Hicks has a corresponding claim basedon the problems with the accounting records that he had to resolve when he tookthe businesses over.

[39]

In my view Dr. Armstrong is not entitled to any of these costs.

analysis starts with the issue of financing.

My

While the agreement between the

parties clearly states that $350,000.00 is to be paid to Dr. Armstrong by theearlier of 60 days after the transaction closed or when financing was completed.
It is clear that Dr. Hicks has not complied with this provision.

That failure is the

basis of Dr. Armstrong’s claim for costs.

[40]

However, Dr. Hicks has made his best efforts to obtain financing in this

case. This was a very complicated transaction involving nearly $3 million in debt,seven properties and four businesses.

It is clear from the materials that have

standing. This is a claim that is directly related to Dr. Armstrong’s claim, so I will

- 15 -

transaction.

Given the very significant debtload in this transaction, and the fact

that RBC had entered into forebearance agreements, it is clear that lenderswould have wanted complete financial statements before agreeing to finance thistransaction.

[41]

This brings me to the evidence about the bookkeeping practices at the

various businesses. It is clear that, as of July 31st, 2015, the businesses lost theirlongstanding bookkeeper, Melissa Thomas.

The parties were also separating

their interests at that time, and attempting collaborative family mediation.

[42]

The failure of the collaborative family mediation, and decisions that both

parties made, resulted in financial records for the fiscal year ending July 31 st,2016 that required some significant work to straighten out.

Dr. Armstrong

contributed to this problem by running a significant portion of the revenue for allof the businesses through a new bank account.

This required time to unwind.

Dr. Hicks contributed to this problem by unilaterally separating the large animalbusiness from the rest of the business.

This delay is the responsibility of both

parties and should not result in compensation in costs for one party.

[43]

As a result of these recordkeeping and accounting problems, Dr. Hicks

was unable to complete the transaction until the accounting issues were resolved

been filed that the lenders would want to complete due diligence on this

- 16 -

This left Dr. Armstrong with two alternatives. First,

she could have repudiated the transaction and sought to unwind the agreement.
The result of that would have likely been foreclosure on the part of RBC, and aloss to both parties.

Dr. Armstrong’s second choice was to attempt to complete

the transaction. That is the choice she has made, but it was her choice. I do notsee that choice resulting in damages payable to Dr. Armstrong, unless she canprove those damages.

[44]

Second, the interest that Dr. Armstrong is seeking would amount to less

than $3,000.00.

This amount is less than the interest that Dr. Armstrong is

entitled to under paragraph 28 of the Consent Order. As a result, Dr. Armstronghas not suffered any loss in respect of interest.

[45]

Then there are the legal costs.

The legal fees incurred since the

settlement was signed were incurred for a number of reasons, including toprotect Dr. Armstrong’s position as the transaction was processed.

There is

nothing in the agreement itself that would entitle Dr. Armstrong to recoup costsbecause of the late completion of the agreement.

[46]

Counsel for Dr. Armstrong argues that Dr. Hicks’ failure to complete the

transaction in a timely way is a breach of contract. While I accept that, I notedabove that Dr. Armstrong had the option to decide whether to treat this contract

and financing was obtained.

- 17 -

She chose to have it fulfilled, which

ensures that she receives the payments that she was entitled to under thecontract.

The interest provision in the agreement is designed to compensate her

for the delays in receiving her money. Absent express language in the contract, I
am not prepared to compensate Dr. Armstrong for legal costs incurred as bothsides made good faith efforts to complete the terms of their agreement.

[47]

As a result, Dr. Armstrong’s claim for additional compensation for costs

and expenses is dismissed except that she is entitled to interest on the amountowing under the agreement at 2%, which is the interest rate set out in paragraph28 of the agreement between the parties.

[48]

I note that Dr. Hicks was also seeking compensation for all of the money

that he spent on accounting advice, legal assistance and other help.

I am

dismissing his claim for the same reasons that I have dismissed Dr. Armstrong’sclaim in this respect.
Hicks’ claim.

However, there is one further reason for dismissing Dr.

All of these professional costs were costs that he would have had

to absorb in order to complete the transaction in any event, and these costs wereforeseeable on May 27th, 2016 when Dr. Hicks signed the agreement.

If he had

wished for Dr. Armstrong to make a contribution to those costs, he could have

at an end or to attempt to have it fulfilled.

- 18 -

He did not do so, and should not be

entitled to obtain indemnity for those costs at this late date.

Conclusion

[49]

For the foregoing reasons, I make no changes to the Order of May 27th,

2016.

[50]

Success on this motion appears to me to be divided. As a result, if either

party wishes to make costs submissions, they are to do so by no later than June13th, 2017.

Those submissions are to be no more than two (2) double-spaced

pages in length, exclusive of bills of cost and caselaw.

[51]

Reply submissions from either party are due by June 20 th, 2017 and are

to be no more than one (1) double-spaced page.

[52]

Finally, as I have noted, this was a very complex transaction. I would be

remiss if I did not observe in writing, as I did in open court, that I am grateful toboth

counsel

for

the

good humour,

good faith and

demonstrated throughout these proceedings.

goodwill that they

negotiated that as part of the agreement.

___________________________
LeMay J.

DATE: May 30, 2017

- 19 -

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE ONTARIO

RE:

BEFORE:

KATHRYN ALEXANDRA
ARMSTRONG v. ROBERT
BRYAN HICKS
LeMay J.

COUNSEL: J. Byrne, Counsel forApplicantE. Cohen, Counsel forRespondent

thethe

ENDORSEMENT

LeMay J.

DATE: May 30, 2017

CITATION: Armstrong v. Hicks, 2017 ONSC 3329
COURT FILE NO.: 20/16
DATE: 05 30 2017

