SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE – ONTARIO
BETWEEN:
DAVID AXELROD and CHAD-WICK CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT INC.
Plaintiffs
- andPRIMONT MANAGEM ENT CORPORATION, PRIMONT
HOMES (HARMONY) INC., PRIMONT HOMES
(CASTLEM ORE) INC., PRIMONT HOMES (MAPLE) INC.
and PRIMONT HOMES (MAJOR MACK) INC.
DefendantsBEFORE:

MASTER M.P. McGRAW

COUNSEL:

Julius KoEmail: jko@dakllp.com
-for the Defendants/Plaintiffs by Counterclaim, Primont ManagementCorporation, Primont Homes (Harmony Inc.), Primont Homes (Castlemore)
Inc., Primont Homes (Maple) Inc. and Primont Homes (Major Mack) Inc.
Jordan GoldblattEmail: jgoldblatt@adairbarristers.com
-for the Plaintiffs/Defendants by Counterclaim, David Axelrod, Chad-WickConstruction Management Inc. and Kersdale Investments Inc.

REASONS RELEASED: May 17, 2017
Reasons For EndorsementI.

Background

[1]
This is a motion by the defendants/plaintiffs by counterclaim, Primont ManagementCorporation, Primont Homes (Harmony Inc.), Primont Homes (Castlemore) Inc., Primont Homes
(Maple Inc.) and Primont Homes (Major Mack) Inc. (collectively, “Primont” or the
“Defendants”) seeking to compel the plaintiffs/defendants by counterclaim, David Axelrod,

CITATION: Axelrod et al v. Primont Management Corporation et al, 2017 ONSC 3082
COURT FILE NO.: CV-15-521400
MOTION HEARD: 20170503
REASONS RELEASED: 20170517

-2-

[2]
A motion by the Plaintiffs seeking to compel the Defendants to provide answers toundertakings given by Joe Monestano of Primont at his examination for discovery on July 14,2015 was also to have proceeded today. Both motions were adjourned on consent by MasterPope on March 8, 2017 to provide the parties with additional time to exchange positions andanswers.

[3]
The Plaintiffs’ motion was resolved on consent with only the issue of costs outstandingsubject to the Defendants’ undertaking to deliver the documents with respect to Question 599. Itwas apparent from the materials filed on the Defendants’ motion and my discussions withcounsel that, as with the Plaintiffs’ motion, in the days leading up to the court attendance, theoutstanding questions and requests continued to be resolved and narrowed. In fact, the chartrelied upon by the Defendants was revised materially immediately prior to this attendance.

[4]
Many of the undertakings which are the subject of the Defendants’ motion appeared torelate to best efforts taken by the Plaintiffs or follow-up questions or requests by the Defendants.
This ongoing exchange of documents and positions in advance of this attendance led to theresolution of the Plaintiffs’ motion. Therefore, I urged counsel to continue these discussions andexchanges given that additional time might assist in resolving these issues without the need for acontested motion.

[5]
However, discussions in court and between counsel outside of court failed to result in anagreement. Counsel advised that they did not believe that any further discussion would changethe parties’ positions on the outstanding questions and that direction was required in advance of ascheduled attendance in To Be Spoken To Court on May 29, 2017. Therefore, the motionproceeded with respect to 11 undertakings, 12 under advisements and 8 refusals.

[6]
This is an action by the Plaintiffs for wrongful dismissal arising from the termination ofMr. Axelrod’s employment as a construction supervisor for Primont, a residential home builder.
Mr. Axelrod invoiced Primont through his corporation Chad-Wick Construction ManagementInc. (“Chad-Wick”). Mr. Axelrod was employed with Primont from December 2010 until histermination on November 28, 2014. In their Statement of Claim dated March 2, 2015, thePlaintiffs claim general and special damages in the amount of $60,000 for breach of contract,unpaid amounts of $3,911.54 and punitive damages in the amount of $25,000.

[7]
In their Statement of Defence and Counterclaim dated February 27, 2015 (the
“Counterclaim”), the Defendants allege that that Mr. Axelrod fundamentally breached the termsof his employment and his fiduciary duties by, among other things, utilizing the trades, materials,equipment and supplies of Primont on other projects and for homeowners who had purchasedhomes from Primont in competition with Primont without Primont’s consent or knowledge. The

Chad-Wick Construction Management Inc. and Kersdale Investments Inc. (collectively, the
“Plaintiffs”) to answer undertakings, questions taken under advisement and refusals arising fromthe examination for discovery of David Axelrod at his examination for discovery held on July13, 2015.

-3-

Defendants claim general damages in the amount of $500,000 and punitive damages in theamount of $100,000.

[8]

The parties did not file any written legal submissions.

[9]

Rule 31.06 provides that:
(1) A person examined for discovery shall answer, to the best of his or her knowledge,information and belief, any proper question relevant to any matter in issue in theaction….

[10]
In considering the submissions of the parties and arriving at my conclusions, I haveconsidered and relied on Rule 29.2.03 which sets out the proportionality factors which apply toboth oral and documentary discovery:
(1) In making a determination as to whether a party or other person must answer aquestion or produce a document, the court shall consider whether,
(a) the time required for the party or other person to answer the question orproduce the document would be unreasonable;
(b) the expense associated with answering the question or producing thedocument would be unjustified;
(c) requiring the party or other person to answer the question or produce thedocument would cause him or her undue prejudice;
(d) requiring the party or other person to answer the question or produce thedocument would unduly interfere with the orderly progress of the action; and
(e) the information or the document is readily available to the party requesting itfrom another source.
(2) In addition to the considerations listed in subrule (1), in determining whether to ordera party or other person to produce one or more documents, the court shall considerwhether such an order would result in an excessive volume of documents required to beproduced by the party or other person.

[11]
Relevance, the scope of discovery and proportionality were explained and appliedcomprehensively by Perell J. in Ontario v. Rothmans Inc., 2011 ONSC 2504. In particular,discovery questions must be relevant to the issues as defined by the pleadings. Overbroad andspeculative discovery and “fishing expeditions” are not permitted.

[12]
Some of the Defendants’ requests for additional documents relate to documents whichthe Plaintiffs state do not exist and/or where the Plaintiffs say that they have produced allrelevant documents in their possession or control. In my view, such circumstances are similar to

II. The Law and Analysis

Arenza Global Technologies Corp v. Cue Network Ltd., [2000] O.J. No. 1524 (S.C.J.) in whichMaster Haberman (as she then was) ordered the defendants to re-attend at examinations fordiscovery rather than deliver a further and better affidavit of documents where it was not clearthat the documents which the plaintiffs were seeking even existed. In Master Haberman’s view,it was not appropriate to order the delivery of a further and better affidavit of documents at thattime, rather, the appropriate time for further productions would be if further documents wereidentified on oral discovery.

[13]
Counsel for the Defendants advised that, with respect to certain requests, the Defendantsmay require that Mr. Axelrod re-attend on discovery to answer questions, including aboutdocuments which have been produced or documents that may exist. Counsel also advised theDefendants may bring a motion under Rule 30.10 for the production of documents and recordsfrom non-parties which are the subject of this motion.

[14]
The chart of undertakings, questions taken under advisement and refusals which counselrelied on is attached to this Endorsement as Schedule “A” (the “Chart”). My conclusions withrespect to each are set out in the paragraphs below and correspond with the answers, updatedanswers and comments set out in the Chart.

[15]
Undertaking #3 – As a follow-up question, the Defendants ask when work at theRothbury site ended. The Plaintiffs have advised that worked ended on or about September 30,2011. Defendants’ counsel advises that the Defendants now agree that this undertaking has beenanswered. This undertaking is satisfied.

[16]
Undertaking #5 – As a follow up question, the Defendants ask when all plans from thearchitect for the Estrin project were received. The Defendants submit that date of thearchitectural plans is relevant because it will show when Mr. Axelrod was working on thiscompeting project. The Plaintiffs have already advised that Mr. Axelrod has provided allinformation to the best of his knowledge, information and belief: “a complete set of proposeddrawings for final budget purposes was received February 15, 2015.” Defendants’ counsel couldnot distinguish how the date of the architectural plans is or might be different from the February15, 2015 date for the complete set of proposed drawings or how this might be relevant. In anyevent, the Plaintiffs say that this is all of the information they have in response to this question.
In my view, this undertaking is satisfied and any further follow-up questions can be asked on reattendance on discovery and any additional documents identified at that time.

[17]
Undertaking #6 and Under Advisements #6-#10 – This 1 undertaking and 5 questionstaken under advisement were addressed as a group. All of these questions relate to the productionof financial statements or income tax returns for the Plaintiffs. With respect to the income taxreturns for Mr. Axelrod and Chad-Wick, the Plaintiffs state that they have produced all of Mr.Axelrod’s tax returns and all of Chad-Wick’s financial statements from 2010 to the present. Asabove, I conclude that the undertaking and under advisements with respect to these requests aresatisfied and any further relevant questions and documents can be addressed on re-attendance atdiscovery. With respect to the Defendants’ request for the bank statements, financial statements

-4-

and tax returns of Kersdale Investments Inc. (“Kersdale”) from March, 2014 to the present
(Under Advisements #9-#10), the Plaintiffs take the position that these documents are notrelevant to the issues in dispute. However, the Defendants named Kersdale as a defendant bycounterclaim, making them a party to this litigation and at paragraph 22 of the Counterclaim, theDefendants allege that Mr. Axelrod “used Chad-Wick and Kersdale to carry out his competingactivities and breach his fiduciary and employment duties”. Accordingly, in my view, based onthe pleadings, the Defendants’ requests are relevant to matters at issue in the Counterclaim,namely, any role or use of Kersdale in the breaches alleged by the Defendants. Therefore, theDefendants are entitled to this information, which the Plaintiffs have already produced for ChadWick and the Plaintiffs shall produce these documents within 30 days.

[18]
Undertaking #7 - In response to a request for invoices of costs of any of Mr. Axelrod’sor Chad-Wick’s replacement jobs, the Plaintiffs state that all costs were paid directly by thehomeowners and Mr. Axelrod and Chad-Wick invoiced for their services. As a follow-upquestion, the Defendants ask if any inquiries have been made to the homeowners “for copies ofinvoices and purchases”. The Plaintiffs advise that they have no copies and their position is thatthey are not obligated to request these documents from the homeowners which the Defendantscan request directly from the homeowners or seek on a motion under Rule 30.10. I am notconvinced that the documents requested by the Defendants are anything more than marginallyrelevant given that the costs were paid by the homeowners and they have already received fullproduction on the relevant issue of how much the Plaintiffs profited from or were paid for thesejobs. Further, it would be contrary to proportionality for the Plaintiffs to be ordered to incur thetime and cost of obtaining these documents from the homeowners where the relevance isquestionable. Accordingly, this undertaking is satisfied and the Defendants have the option ofbringing a Rule 30.10 motion to seek these documents directly from the homeowners.

[19]
Undertakings #11, #13, #17 –These undertakings deal primarily with the Defendants’
requests for lists of trades, subcontractors and suppliers used on jobs by Mr. Axelrod and ChadWick, including the Kersdale job, the 10 Church Street project and all other Chad-Wick projects.
The request with respect to the Kersdale job requested names and contact information for tradesthat were not doing work for Trimont. The Plaintiffs have provided the only list which Mr.Axelrod has for the trades with contact details for the Kersdale job. The Defendants state that
“no list has been provided for the trades on the Kersdale job that were not doing work forPrimont”. Similarly, with respect to the request for all trades, subcontractors and suppliers for alljobs, the Plaintiffs state that they have provided all information and documentation in theirpossession or control. On both these requests, since the Plaintiffs have produced the only listthey have, there is nothing more to produce at this point and any further relevant questionsregarding the list or the trades can be asked on re-attendance on discovery. With respect to theChurch Street project, the Defendants requested the names of the trades and to advise if Mr.Axelrod was paid a fee for this project. The Plaintiffs have provided the names of the trades andconfirmed that Mr. Axelrod was not paid a fee while noting that the trades were either paiddirectly by the owner or by Mr. Axelrod by personal cheque. The Defendants take issue becauseno copies of these cheques have been provided, however, they did not and have not requestedthem. Therefore, as above, any further relevant questions regarding these cheques or other

-5-

-6-

[20]
Undertaking #15 – Mr. Axelrod undertook to produce any receipts for gas purchasedpersonally or through Chad-Wick for the Primont vehicle from March to November, 2014. Mr.Axelrod searched his records but could not find any receipts, however, he has produced his bankstatements for this period which list purchases from Petro Canada. As a follow-up question, theDefendants ask if the Petro Canada entries indicate gas purchased for the Primont vehicle. Mr.Axelrod states that he has no further information. Accordingly, as above, any further questionscan be asked on re-attendance at discovery. This undertaking is satisfied.

[21]
Undertakings #21-#22 – These two undertakings relate to documents from non-parties,Central Fairbank Lumber (Undertaking #21) and the owner of the Connaught Ave. project
(Undertaking #22). Mr. Axelrod advised that he does not have any delivery bills, receipts forpick-up or packing slips for any Chad-wick project from Central Fairbank Lumber. The Plaintiffssent a letter dated March 28, 2017 to Central Fairbank Lumber requesting these documents andundertook to deliver these documents as soon as they are available. As a follow-up question, theDefendants ask if the Plaintiffs have made any follow-ups with Central Fairbank Lumber. I amuncertain why such a question is the subject of a motion particularly given how recent the letterwas sent. The Plaintiffs will follow up in due course and once they have done so, if thedocuments are not provided by Central Fairbank Lumber, then this undertaking will be satisfied.
The Defendants have the option of requesting the documents directly from Central FairbankLumber or bringing a Rule 30.10 motion. With respect to the Connaught Ave. project, theDefendants request any written communication between the Plaintiffs and the owner regardingthe termination of this project. Mr. Axelrod has searched for any records and advised that he nolonger has any such documentation in his possession or control and does not usually retaincopies of documentation from projects which have been terminated. The Defendants have askedif the Plaintiffs have requested any such documentation from the owner of the Connaught Ave.
project. The Plaintiffs’ position is that the Defendants can request the documents themselves orbring a Rule 30.10 motion. I agree with the Defendants that the Plaintiffs should, as they did withCentral Fairbank Lumber, make best efforts to request and obtain any relevant documentationincluding copies of communications regarding the termination of the Connaught Ave. projectwithin 30 days.

[22]
Undertakings #25-#26 – These undertakings relate to particulars and facts with respectto the Plaintiffs’ damage claims. In Undertaking #25, the Plaintiffs undertook to provideparticulars for general and special damages and advised that there are no particulars other thanwhat is outlined in the Statement of Claim. The Defendants’ position is that this answer is nonresponsive and that the Plaintiffs should “either provide particulars or withdraw the claim”. Thisis not a particulars motion or a motion to strike a pleading and counsel for the Defendantsprovided no legal basis to support their position that the Defendants are entitled to any additionalparticulars at this time or that the Plaintiffs should withdraw their claim. In Undertaking #26, theDefendants requested what facts the Plaintiffs rely upon for their claim for punitive, aggravatedand exemplary damages. In response, the Plaintiffs have advised that the manner of termination,

relevant documents can be asked on re-attendance on discovery. All three of these undertakingsare satisfied.

the suggestion that Mr. Axelrod was in competition with Primont, the communications made byPrimont to other builders trades and suppliers and the breach of Mr. Axelrod’s privacy right giverise to these damages. The Defendants ask a series of follow-up questions and state thatexamples do not help, that they are entitled to “all the facts and evidence”. Again, counsel for theDefendants was unable to provide any legal basis for this alleged entitlement. In my view, inaddition to the absence of any specific legal entitlement, proportionality dictates that both ofthese undertakings are satisfied, that no further costs or efforts should be expended and anyfurther relevant questions can be asked on re-attendance on discovery.

[23]
Under Advisements #1, #2, #3 – These questions all relate to Mr. Axelrod’s son Chad,who Mr. Axelrod hired as site superintendent on the Kersdale property project. The Defendantsrequest that the Plaintiffs produce Chad’s superintendent log and any records, including invoicesand payroll records that show the number of hours that Chad put in on the Kersdale project. ThePlaintiffs have produced all of the records in their possession or control with respect to costs,invoices and contacts for trades and any records regarding the hours Mr. Axelrod put in withrespect this project and take the position that the information with respect to Chad, a non-party,is not relevant. Counsel for the Defendants submits that the documentation with respect to Chadmay provide information with respect to when and how much Mr. Axelrod was on the Kersdaleproject. In my view, this is mere speculation at best as I fail to see how Chad’s hours and recordswill reflect when and how much his father was on site, making its relevance marginal at best. I
conclude that the Plaintiffs are not required to answer these questions.

[24]
Under Advisements #11, #12, #13 - These questions arise from requests by theDefendants for all bids submitted by the Plaintiffs on other projects from November 28, 2014 tothe present; all invoices, quotations or other communications received from any trades withrespect to the Kersdale project or other projects; and to provide all invoices paid to all othertrades and suppliers with respect to the other work that Chad-wick performed from 2010
forward. In each case, the Plaintiffs advise that they have produced all documents in Mr.Axelrod’s possession or control which are responsive to these requests: the ConstructionAgreement for the 234 Delhi Project and the invoices for the Kersdale project, noting again thatall trade invoices were paid directly by the project owners. Counsel for the Defendants state thatif the payor of the invoices is controlled by the Plaintiffs then they are entitled to disclosure,otherwise, if the payor is a non-party, they can bring a Rule 30.10 motion to obtain disclosure.
The Plaintiffs have advised that none of the invoices were paid by any of the Plaintiffs and in anyevent, they have produced all of the relevant documents in their possession or control.
Accordingly, as with similar requests discussed above, the Defendants can ask further questionson re-attendance on discovery or, as their counsel acknowledges, bring a Rule 30.10 motion toseek production from non-parties. The Plaintiffs are not required to answer these questions.

[25]
Under Advisement #14 – This question arises from the Defendants’ request for thePlaintiffs’ witness statements or summaries of anticipated evidence of witnesses on the basis thatthe Plaintiffs have set this matter down for trial and seek a trial date. Counsel for the Defendantscould not provide any legal basis which gives rise to the requirement to provide witnessstatements or summaries, which are typically addressed at the pre-trial conference to schedule

-7-

-8-

[26]
Refusals #1, #2, #5, #9, #10 – The Plaintiffs have refused these related requests by theDefendants to produce Mr. Axelrod’s cellular phone records for the period when he wasemployed by Primont; authorization to obtain these records from Rogers; access to Mr.Axelrod’s cellular phone to obtain any copies of any e-mails sent and received; consent tocontact his cellular phone service provider for access to any e-mails; and access to Chad-Wick’sserver to review any e-mails with respect to the Kersdale project. The Plaintiffs submit that theserequests are not relevant and are overly broad. Defendants’ counsel submits that these recordswill show who Mr. Axelrod was speaking with, texting and/or emailing while he was supposedto be a full-time site supervisor for Primont and that Mr. Axelrod has not produced any such emails. In my view, all 5 of these requests are overly broad, speculative and contrary toproportionality, particularly, the requests for access to Mr. Axelrod’s cellular phone and ChadWick’s server which constitute “fishing expeditions”. The Defendants have not made anymeaningful attempt to limit these requests by date or issue which would address not onlyrelevance but the number of documents which would be generated and the time and cost requiredto obtain and review them. While the Plaintiffs have an ongoing obligation under Rule 30 toproduce relevant documents, including e-mails, the Plaintiffs state that they have produced allrelevant documents in their possession or control. The Defendants cannot point to any evidencewhich casts doubt on the Plaintiff’s documentary discovery efforts to date and therefore, anyfurther relevant questions regarding additional relevant documents which may exist are moreproperly posed on re-attendance on discovery. The Plaintiffs are not required to answer these 5
questions.

[27]
Refusal #4 - The Plaintiffs refuse to provide information with respect to who Mr.Axelrod and Chad-Wick are currently pricing projects for. The Plaintiffs have provided thisinformation for the alleged 8-month notice period after Mr. Axelrod’s termination to addressmitigation and take the position that anything beyond that date is not relevant. The Defendantsappear from the Chart to have accepted this information in full satisfaction of this request.
However, to the extent to which they do not, I agree with the Plaintiffs that any informationregarding the identity of who Mr. Axelrod and Chad-Wick are pricing for beyond the 8-monthnotice period is not relevant and need not be produced.

[28]
Refusal #7 – The Plaintiffs refuse to advise if Mr. Bloom, a partner in Kersdale, enteredinto a contract with some entity respect to certain projects. Counsel advised that Kersdaleincorporated entities to bid for and complete jobs. The Defendants state that Mr. Bloom likelycontracted with Chad-Wick in some capacity while the Plaintiffs were still employed withPrimont. It is not clear to me, nor did counsel’s submissions make it any clearer, how anypersonal contracts entered into by Mr. Bloom, a non-party, would be relevant to matters at issuein this litigation. Given that Kersdale is a party to these proceedings, it would appear that anycontracts which Kersdale entered into might be relevant but that is not what has been requested.
Therefore, as currently framed, I conclude that this question is speculative, not relevant and neednot be answered by the Plaintiffs. Any further, properly framed and relevant questions can beasked on re-attendance on discovery.

the trial. Accordingly, the Plaintiffs are not required to answer this question.

[29]
Refusal #8 - The Plaintiffs refuse to answer who from the Eversfield group of investorswould have been in contact with Icon Plumbing on the basis that both Eversfield and Icon arenon-parties. The Defendants submit that this is relevant to the issue of competition given thatIcon, a Primont trade, may have been directed by Eversfield or Mr. Axelrod and that thisinformation will help determine if the Plaintiffs were directing Icon while employed by Primont.
Given that Eversfield and Icon are non-parties, are not under the control of the Plaintiffs and thespeculative, marginally relevant and remote nature of this request, in my view, the question ascurrently framed need not be answered.

[30]
Based on my review and consideration of the circumstances and factors set out above, I
conclude that, other than with respect to Undertaking #22 and Under Advisements #9 and #10,the relief sought by the Defendants on this motion should be dismissed.
III.

[31]

DispositionOrder to go as follows:
i.)

ii.)

iii.)

the Plaintiffs shall make best efforts to request and obtain any relevantdocumentation including copies of communications regarding thetermination of the Connaught Ave. project from the owner of the projectwithin 30 days of the date of this Order;the Plaintiffs shall produce the bank statements, financial statements andtax returns of the defendant by counterclaim Kersdale Investments Inc.
from March, 2014 to the present to the Defendants within 30 days of thedate of this Order;the balance of the Defendants’ motion is dismissed.

[32]
Counsel exchanged costs outlines at the conclusion of the motion. If the parties areunable to agree on the costs of both motions, they may file costs outlines and written costssubmissions not to exceed 2 pages (excluding costs outlines) with me through the MastersAdministration Office on or before June 30, 2017.
Released: May 17, 2017
__________________________

Master M.P. McGraw

-9-

