ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

KIMBERLEY BABIN
Plaintiff )
– and –
BAYER INC., BAYER PHARMA AG, and )
BAYER OY
Defendants
Proceeding under the Class Proceedings Act, 1992 )

Bryan McPhadden for the Plaintiff

William McNamara and Irfan Kara for theDefendants

HEARD: May 10, 2017

PERELL, J.
REASONS FOR DECISION
A. INTRODUCTION

[1]
In the case at bar, there is a multiplicity of class actions about the same alleged harm.
The defendants, Bayer Inc., which is a Canadian corporation, Bayer Pharma AG, and Bayer OY,which are foreign corporations, are sued in three proposed national class actions, one in Alberta,one in Québec, and this one in Ontario, in which the plaintiff is Kimberley Babin. In a fourthproposed national class action, Bayer Inc. is sued, also, in Alberta. (There is also an individualplaintiff action against Bayer in Nova Scotia.) A consortium of lawyers acts for the plaintiffs inall four proposed class actions.

[2]
The representative plaintiffs in the four proposed class actions are Kimberley Babin inOntario, Ninon Bertrand in Québec, and Cindy Chrenek and Elizabeth Todd in Alberta. All theproposed representative plaintiffs allege that the defendants are liable for negligence for failingto warn that their contraceptive intrauterine device with the brand name “Mirena” could migrateinside the body causing personal injuries.

[3]
The consortium acting for the proposed representative plaintiffs is comprised of:
McPhadden Samac Tuovi LLP (actions in Ontario and in Alberta); Lex Group Inc. (the action in

CITATION: Babin v. Bayer Inc., 2017 ONSC 3200
COURT FILE NO.: CV-13-482667CP
DATE: 20170525

2

[4]
The Ontario, Québec,was formed, but the law firmsformed a consortium, and theAs a result, the other actionsi.e., in the patois of the classclass actions were “parked.”

and one Alberta action were commenced before the consortiumfor the respective plaintiffs agreed to work together. The law firmsconsortium decided to prosecute only the class action in Alberta.
were formally stayed in Québec and informally stayed in Ontario;action cognoscenti, the overlapping Québec and Ontario proposed

[5]
However, two years ago, there was a change in the consortium’s plans, and McPhaddenSamac Tuovi, Ontario counsel, sought to revive the parked Ontario action and Ms. Babin soughtto schedule a certification motion of her proposed class action. The defendants, however,objected, and they brought a motion to have the Ontario action formally stayed in favour of theAlberta actions.

[6]
There were cross-examinations, a refusals motion, an unsuccessful appeal of the refusalsmotion, and the defendants’ motion for a stay now comes on for decision.

[7]
For the reasons that follow, I grant the defendants’ motion, and I now formally stay theOntario action subject to further order of this court.
B. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

[8]
Bayer Pharma AG, which is a German corporation, is the parent of Bayer OY, which is aFinland corporation that manufactures Mirena, a contraceptive intrauterine device. Bayer PharmaAG is also the parent of Bayer Inc., the corporation that sells Mirena in Canada.

[9]
Mirena is also sold in the United States, and since at least 2009, the U.S. productmonograph has contained a warning that the intrauterine device might migrate in the body. Thiswarning was not found in the Canadian version of the monograph until late 2014.

[10] On June 13, 2013, in Ontario, Ms. Babin commenced her action (Babin v. Bayer Inc.). I
was assigned to case manage the proposed national class action. The action was against BayerInc., Bayer Pharma AG, and Bayer OY (collectively “Bayer”). Ms. Babin alleged that Bayerfailed to warn of the risk of the intrauterine device migrating from the uterus. The Statement ofClaim was served on all of the defendants. Ms. Babin’s counsel of record was McPhaddenSamac Tuovi.

[11] On June 26, 2013, in Québec, Mme. Bertrand commenced her action (Bertrand c. BayerInc.). Justice Monast of the Superior Court of Québec was assigned to case manage the proposednational class action. The action was against Bayer Inc., Bayer Pharma AG, and Bayer OY.
Mme. Bertrand alleged that Bayer failed to warn of the risk of the intrauterine device migratingfrom the uterus. The Statement of Claim was served on all of the defendants. Mme. Bertrand’scounsel of record was Lex Group Inc.

[12] Also on June 26, 2013, in Alberta, Cindy Chrenek commenced her action (Chrenek v.
Bayer Inc.). Justice Strekaf of the Alberta Court of Queen’s Bench was assigned to case managethe proposed national class action. The action was against Bayer Inc. alone. Ms. Chrenek allegedthat Bayer Inc. failed to warn of the risk of the intrauterine device migrating from the uterus. TheStatement of Claim was served on Bayer Inc. Ms. Chrenek’s counsel of record was Docken &
Company.

Québec), and Docken & Company, formerly Docken Klym (an action in Alberta).

3

[13] On April 2, 2014, in Alberta, Ms. Chrenek delivered an application for certification withsupporting affidavit material.

CASE MANAGEMENT MEETING MINUTES
Prior to the case management meeting, the Plaintiff had filed a Notice of Application for

Certification and Affidavit of the proposed representative Plaintiff. Mr. Docken had alsocirculated a proposed timetable leading to a certification hearing.
The Court was apprised of the Plaintiff’s intention to file additional material in support of thecertification application as well as with respect to the existence of other class proceedings inNova Scotia, Quebec and Ontario, also seeking to certify a national class. Mr. Leurerindicated that the Defendant was opposed to the concurrent prosecution of multiple actionsseeking to certify a national class, and that it was also premature to set a date for certificationin light of the fact that the Plaintiff was intending to supplement the record. Mr. Dockenconfirmed the intention to work with counsel in other provinces to agree on the prosecution ofa certification application in one jurisdiction.
The parties and the Court discussed the advisability of setting a schedule leading tocertification in the light of the fact that the Plaintiff had not filed their complete record insupport of certification and uncertainty as to whether the certification application in thisaction, or one of the actions commenced in another province, would be prosecuted.
In the result, the case management meeting was adjourned to 9:00 a.m. on Tuesday, June 24,2014 on the understanding that:
1. By May 30, the Plaintiff will have filed and served any additional affidavit evidence reliedupon in support of the application to certify this action as a class action;2. In the same timeframe, the Plaintiff will have declared whether this action, or an action inone of the other provinces, would be prosecuted to a certification application;3. If it is the Plaintiff's intention to prosecute this action to a certification application, prior tothe June 24, 2014 case management meeting, the parties will discuss, and attempt to agree on,a schedule of litigation events leading to the hearing of that application.
….

[15] As appears, the case management conference in Alberta was adjourned to June 24, 2014.
However, the conference did not proceed on that date. Rather, the parties needed more time toreview the plaintiff’s motion material, and they requested and were granted a furtheradjournment to a date to be arranged.

[16] During the summer of July 2014, there were discussions between McPhadden SamacTuovi and Docken & Company about forming a consortium to prosecute a national class actionagainst Bayer. These discussions, along with discussions with Lex Group, culminated in aconsortium agreement. The consortium decided to seek certification in Alberta. The casemanagement judges were advised of this development.

[17] In Québec, Justice Monast issued a formal order staying the action. In Ontario, I took noformal step and simply assumed that the national class action would advance in Alberta. At thetime, I was unaware that Bayer had originally asked for a permanent stay of the Ontario action

[14] On April 8, 2014, there was a case management conference in Alberta. The minutes ofthe conference, which are self-explanatory, state:

but this had been rebuffed by the consortium. At the time, I was not aware that Bayer’s lawyerswere told that the plaintiffs would not re-litigate matters decided in another jurisdiction but thatthe Alberta action would be pursued only if the action proceeded expeditiously in that province.
In other words, Ms. Babin’s counsel advised Bayer’s counsel in Ontario that there was nointention to proceed with a national class action in Ontario or Québec provided that matters wereprogressing in Alberta.

[18] On October 1, 2014, in Alberta, Ms. Todd issued her proposed class action against Bayer
(Todd v. Bayer Inc.). Ms. Todd’s counsel of record was McPhadden Samac Tuovi. Later thatmonth, on October 24, 2014, Ms. Todd provided an affidavit as a proposed new representativeplaintiff in Ms. Chrenek’s action. In his affidavit for the motion now before the court Mr. Tuovi,of McPhadden Samac Tuovi, explained at paragraphs 18 and 19 the reason for commencing asecond national class action in Alberta. He stated:
18. Accordingly, from the perspective of their liability, our preference was that the foreigndefendants be parties to the litigation. To that end, when we commenced our own action in Albertain October 2014, we named these defendants in addition to the Canadian defendant. …. Wecommenced that action when it appeared to us that unexplained delays we re impeding the progressof Mr. Docken's Alberta action. Should those delays have proven to be temporary, we couldconsolidate our action with Mr. Docken's; should they prove to be persistent; however, we wouldhave been able to prosecute our own action in Alberta more diligently.
19. If consolidation had proven to be unnecessary (upon the removal of the delays impedingprosecution of Mr. Docken's action) or difficult or impossible, we were content to proceed in Mr.Docken's Alberta action in which no foreign defendants were named: as I have explained, we wereprimarily interested in the foreign defendants' evidence and could probably obtain it from them aswitnesses.

[19] In her Statement of Claim, Ms. Todd alleged that Bayer failed to warn of the risk of theintrauterine device migrating from the uterus. Her Statement of Claim was served on Bayer Inc.
However, she has never served her Statement of Claim on Bayer Pharma AG and Bayer OY,which, as mentioned above, were not parties to the other Alberta action.

[20] Under Rule 3.26 of the Alberta Rules of Court, "a statement of claim must be served onthe defendant within one year after the date that the statement of claim is filed, unless the Courton application before the one-year time limit expires, grants an extension of time for service."
The foreign Bayer corporations have never been served in the Alberta action and no extensionwas requested before the one-year time limit expired.

[21] Pausing here in the narrative, as of the fall of 2014, Ms. Chrenek’s action was positionedto move forward, but it appears that the consortium turned its attention to consolidating heraction with Ms. Todd’s, and it appears that achieving this purpose preoccupied approximately sixmonths. On April 28, 2015, in Alberta, Chrenek v. Bayer Inc. and Todd v. Bayer Inc. wereconsolidated.

[22] While the Alberta actions were being consolidated, it seems that the consortium alsoturned its attention to moving forward with the long-outstanding matter of scheduling thecertification motion and of the matter that the foreign defendants had not been served in theconsolidated proceedings. There were discussions about consolidation in the winter of 2015, butby the summer of 2015, the consortium proposed to defence counsel an agreement whereby theplaintiffs would retain discovery rights against the foreign defendants but the action as againstthose defendants would be discontinued. Defence counsel did not respond to the proposal.

4

5

[24] Following the decision to rouse the Ontario action, Ms. Babin reconstituted the materialalready filed for the Alberta certification application and on September 25, 2015, the expertretained for the Alberta proceeding swore an affidavit for the Ontario action.

[25] On October 26, 2015, Bayer’s counsel in Alberta raised the issue that Bayer Oy andBayer Pharma AG had not been served and requested that the Todd Statement of Claim beamended to remove them as parties. The consortium did not respond to the request.

[26] On December 31, 2015, the consortium served a motion record for certification in theBabin action in Ontario. The motion material is substantially similar, if not identical, to theapplication for certification already served in Alberta.

[27] In March 2016, Ms. Babin arranged a case management conference for the purpose ofscheduling the certification motion in Ontario. Bayer responded with a request to schedule amotion to stay Ms. Babin’s action in Ontario as an abuse of process. Bayer submitted that theAlberta action against Bayer Inc. is the only action that should be prosecuted. I agreed toschedule the stay motion now before the court.

[28] In response to Bayer’s motion, Ms. Babin delivered an affidavit sworn by Mr. Tuovi. Inhis affidavit, Mr. Tuovi explained how it came about that the consortium had first decided topursue certification in Alberta and then changed course to pursue certification in Ontario. In hisaffidavit, he deposed:
4. …. After the consortium was formed, we were persuaded that the proposed class action couldproceed more expeditiously in Alberta than in Ontario. Accordingly, we decided to seekcertification of a national class in Alberta. At the request of the defendants, we agreed not toprosecute the Ontario and Quebec actions if it meant re-litigating issues. We did not agree to a stayof any kind in respect of the Quebec or Ontario proceeding. With the passage of time, it becameincreasingly evident that the Alberta action was not proceeding expeditiously; this caused us toconsider, and ultimately decide on, a return to prosecution on behalf of a national class in Ontario.
5. Contrary to the allegations made in the defendants' Notice of Motion herein, the decision toreturn to Ontario was driven entirely by concerns for expediency and had litt le to do with the factthat the time to serve the foreign defendants in the Alberta proceeding would come to expire in afew months.
….
9. When discussing with Mr. Docken the various Mirena class actions commenced across Canadaand the possibility of our working together again, he asked whether we would consider pursuingthe Mirena class action nationally in Alberta because, when we had worked together in the past wepursued class actions only through Ontario. Mr. Docken also expressed confidence that thecertification motion in Alberta could be heard expeditiously and probably sooner than in Ontario.
We agreed in June 2014 to finalize our consortium agreement with Docken Klym and to seeknational certification in Alberta.
….
20. As I have stated, the Alberta action did not move forward expeditiously. Accordingly, thecertification motion did not come to be heard there as promptly as expected when we originally

[23] In August 2015, the consortium made the decision to return to Ontario to prosecute Ms.Babin’s proposed national class action. The court in Alberta has never been advised about thisdecision and the scheduling of the Alberta certification motion remains outstanding. Bayer hasnot moved for a stay of the Alberta action.

6
agreed to suspend our Ontario action in favour of continuing in Alberta.

24. Throughout 2015, we were increasingly apprehensive that certification would not be heardanytime soon. We were coming around to the view that the delays impeding progress of Mr.Docken's Alberta litigation would not be overcome soon and were not temporary. No substantiveprogress was seemingly being made in consolidating our Alberta action with Docken Klym'sAlberta action, and the defendants were insisting that service of the Alberta claim on the foreigndefendants be a pre-condition to any discussion of a dismissal of the action against those foreigndefendants in exchange for documentary production.
25. Accordingly, by the end of June 2015, we were giving serious thought to resuming ourprosecution of the Mirena litigation in Ontario. In July 2015, while we were considerin g the meritsof such an approach, but out of an abundance of caution, we served our Alberta proceedingon the Canadian defendant (on July 10, 2015) and considered an order extending the time to servethe foreign defendants in the Alberta proceeding. As our Alberta claim had been filed on October1, 2014, the 1-year deadline to serve the foreign defendants under the Rules of Court of theAlberta Court of Queen's Bench would expire on October 1, 2015.
….
28. In August 2015, in light of the continuing lack of progress in Alberta, we decided to pursuecertification in Ontario instead of Alberta (and Quebec). In 2013, and before entering into theconsortium agreement, our certification record in Ontario had been close to completion. Also, allof the foreign defendants had been served with the Ontario proceeding.
29. We then undertook efforts to complete our Ontario certification record. To do so, we intendedto use the same expert as had been retained relative to the Alberta action. Her affidavit in theOntario action was sworn September 25, 2015, making clear that our decision to proceed inOntario, and not Alberta, had been made sometime prior to that date and certainly prior to theOctober 1, 2015 deadline for service of the Alberta pleading on the foreign defendants. I observethat this time limit is in reference to service and not to a statutory limitation period.
30. I note that, if our decision was based only on a desire to avoid any difficulties that might arisefrom the failure to serve the foreign defendants with our Alberta process, it would have beenconsiderably more expedient and economical for us simp ly to seek to have extended the October2015 deadline to serve the foreign defendants in our Alberta proceeding, rather than to havereconstituted our certification record in Ontario. Indeed, we had drafted an extension order as earlyas July 2015.

C. DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS

[29] During the course of the hearing, there was a discussion of how to characterize Bayer’smotion to stay the Ontario action. However, because I shall not be deciding this motion based onwhich party has the onus of proof, nothing turns on whether the motion is characterized asBayer’s motion to stay the Ontario action or on whether the motion is characterized as Ms.Babin’s request to lift the informal stay of the action and to schedule a certification motion.

[30] I also shall not be deciding the motion on the basis of the alleged agreement between theconsortium and Bayer under which Ms. Babin agreed to an informal stay of the Ontario actionbut reserved the right to have the stay lifted if she was not satisfied by the progress of the actionin Alberta and under which alleged agreement Bayer was precluded or estopped from opposingthe lifting of the stay should the Alberta action not proceed expeditiously. The court was not aparty to the agreement, if that was what it was, and I shall decide the stay motion on its merits.

….

[31] I also shall not be deciding the motion on the basis of the parties pointing an abuse ofprocess finger at one-another. It was not an abuse of process for Ms. Babin to start her action inOntario and then park it to have her counsel participate in a consortium pursuing her claim innational class actions commenced in other provinces. It was not an abuse of process for Bayer toask to be sued in only one national class action, and it is not an abuse of process for it to bring aformal motion to stay the Ontario action after acquiescing to an informal stay of the Ontarioaction, which the consortium now seeks to have lifted.

[32] I shall be deciding this motion on the basis that I discussed in the refusals motion that I
decided in the run up to the motion now before the court, which reasons I incorporate byreference. See Babin v. Bayer Inc., 2016 ONSC 5069, leave to appeal refused, 2016 ONSC 8017
(Div. Ct.).

[33] Thus, I shall be deciding this motion on the basis that there are principled solutions toresolve the problem of a multiplicity of proceedings arising from multiple multi-jurisdictionalclass actions, in this case four national class actions. (I also discuss the problems of multiplemulti-jurisdiction class actions in Kowalyshyn v. Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, Inc.,2016 ONSC 3819.)

[34] In my Reasons for Decision in the refusals motion, I referred to the work of the UniformLaw Commission to define a principled approach to resolving what, practically speaking, is aforum conveniens jurisdiction problem where one or more similarly situated plaintiffs bringssimilar national class actions in one or more jurisdictions. In particular, because the UniformLaw Commission’s recommendations described relevant matters to consider on a motion to staywhen there are multiple national class actions in multiple jurisdictions, I referred to the followingprovisions of the Commission’s proposed legislation:
4(2) If a multi-jurisdictional class proceeding or a proposed multi-jurisdictional class proceedinghas been commenced elsewhere in Canada that involves the same or similar subject matter to thatof the proceeding being considered for certification, the court must determine whether it would bepreferable for some or all of the claims of the proposed class members to be resolved in thatproceeding.
4(3) When making a determination under subsection (2), the court must
(a) be guided by the following objectives:
(i) ensuring that the interests of all parties in each of the relevant jurisdictionsare given due consideration,
(ii) ensuring that the ends of justice are served,
(iii) where possible, avoiding irreconcilable judgments,
(iv) promoting judicial economy; and
(b) consider all relevant factors, including the following:
(i) the alleged basis of liability, including the applicable laws,
(ii) the stage each of the proceedings has reached,
(iii) the plan for the proposed multi-jurisdictional class proceeding, including theviability of the plan and the capacity and resources for advancing the proceeding

7

8
on behalf of the proposed class;

(v) the location of evidence and witnesses.

[35]
Applying the relevant factors to the circumstances of the immediate case, I begin theanalysis by noting that there is no reason to second-guess the initial decisions to stay the actionsin Québec, formally by Justice Monast, and in Ontario, informally by me. Those decisionsavoided a multiplicity of proceedings. Speaking for the Ontario court, there was and is no reasonto think that Ontario citizens as parties to a national class action would not be well served by thecourts of Alberta (or Québec) in a national product liability class action about the defendants’
alleged failure to warn about the harm that could be caused by their product.

[36] The next analytical point to make for the immediate case is that it does not lie in themouth of the consortium to second guess their own decision to prosecute the class action inAlberta and thereby avoid the multiplicity of proceedings of overlapping class actions in Ontarioand Québec. The consortium had no entitlement to hedge its procedural choices. Having chosento prosecute the putative Class Members’ claims in Alberta, the consortium had no entitlementby agreement or estoppel to reserve the right to return to Ontario because it might think that theAlberta action was not proceeding expeditiously. Such a reservation is either forum shopping orreneging on the consortium agreement should there be a falling out or disappointing performanceby the members of the consortium. Once the consortium selected Alberta as the forum for thenational class action it became their responsibility to advance the action in Alberta effectivelyand efficiently and not to reserve the right to have a redo or take a second stab at access to justicein another province.

[37] In this last regard, the consortium seemed to have started off well enough, and a nationalclass action had progressed to the point where the consortium had delivered the certificationmaterial. The consortium should have and could have and can still request Justice Strekaf, withwhom I have never communicated and who seems to have been kept in the dark or inadequatelyadvised about the status of the Alberta action, to schedule the certification motion.

[38] In hindsight, the consortium, which had already served its certification material, wouldhave been better advised to ask Justice Strekaf to reschedule the long-adjourned case conferenceto set a schedule rather that reconstituting the motion material and asking the Ontario court to seta schedule. Further, the consortium did not need to have hindsight to know that they had onlythemselves to blame for the slow progress of the Alberta action. The consortium never did reportany problems to Justice Strekaf and never requested her case management direction to schedulethe Alberta certification motion.

[39] The consortium denies that the real reason that it wished to revive the Ontario action wasnot its disappointment in the progress of the Alberta action but to address the problem that theforeign Bayer companies had not been served in the consolidated Alberta action and it wasapparently too late to do so under the Alberta Rules of Court. Further, the consortium submitsthat in light of the alleged agreement about the forum for the national class action, the foreignBayer companies cannot afford themselves of the juridical advantage of their not being parties tothe Alberta action as a reason for staying the Ontario action in which they do not enjoy this

(iv) the location of class members and class representatives in the variousproceedings, including the ability of class representatives to participate in theproceedings and to represent the interests of class members,

9

[40] For the sake of argument, if I accept that the disappointment in the progress being madein Alberta was the consortium’s genuine reason for seeking to revive the action in Ontario, thenon this assumption, in my opinion, the consortium would be obliged to first return to JusticeStrekaf and deal with the status of the consolidated Alberta action and the status of the parties toit before returning to Ontario. It might be the case that Justice Strekaf could have and could stilldeal with the problem that the foreign Bayer defendants had not been served in the consolidatedaction. It requires court authorization to discontinue or stay a proposed class action, and to thisday, Justice Strekaf has not been asked to address these issues. Nor has she been asked to addressthe problem of a multiplicity of national class actions. It strikes me as all of uncomfortable,discourteous and wanting in comity for this court to decide these issues that could and should beaddressed first by the Alberta court. I, therefore, refuse to exercise my discretion to lift theinformal stay in Ontario, and I grant a formal stay until further order of this court.

[41] Conversely, for the sake of argument, if I accept that the genuine reason for the requestedrevival of the Ontario action is that all of the Bayer defendants have been served in Ontario, thenI do not regard that circumstance as a justification for reviving the Ontario action. Once again, I,therefore, refuse to exercise my discretion to lift the informal stay in Ontario, and I grant aformal stay until further order of this court.

[42]

I have four additional reasons for formally staying the Ontario action.

[43] First, in exercising my discretion in what amounts to a forum conveniens motion, I shouldgive due consideration to the interests of all parties in each of the relevant jurisdictions. In thisregard, I note that if the foreign defendants have achieved a juridical advantage in Alberta, thenthey have done nothing to disentitle themselves from it. Once again, the consortium which hadtime to serve the foreign Bayer defendants have only themselves to blame.

[44] Second, there may in fact be no juridical advantage in Alberta, because I am notconvinced that the service problem cannot be resolved given that the commencement of the Toddaction at least suspended the running of limitation periods. And again, this is a matter that shouldhave been presented first to the court in Alberta. The point here is that the Alberta action is aswell advanced as the Ontario action and there may be no juridical advantage to either side ineither jurisdiction.

[45] Third, I am not convinced that the Class Members are harmed by the absence of theforeign Bayer companies in the Alberta action. In its affidavit in support of the motion toconsolidate the Alberta actions, the consortium incorrectly suggested that the foreign defendantsare necessary parties. However, there is no suggestion that Bayer Inc. is judgment proof, andwhile the foreign defendants are proper parties, they are not necessary parties. Rather, all theBayer defendants are sued for their several liability, but the Chrenek action or the consolidatedChrenek-Todd action can properly proceed just against Bayer Inc. The true reason that theconsortium wishes to keep the foreign Bayer defendants in an action is a matter of convenience,because the joinder provides the most convenient method to obtain discovery evidence.

[46] Indeed, the consortium itself suggested letting the Bayer foreign defendants out of theAlberta action provided that the evidence was made available from them. The Bayer defendantsdid nothing wrong in rejecting this neither fish nor fowl proposition. Further, there is nothing tosuggest that the class action in Alberta, which is essentially built on the patent difference in the

juridical advantage.

10

[47] Fourth, the matter of juridical advantage should have been dealt with, if at all, when theconsortium decided to prosecute the class action in Alberta. It is to encourage forum shopping topermit the consortium to revisit the forum issue because of a self-inflicted procedural wound thatmay not be much more than a matter of facilitating the gathering of discovery evidence.
D. CONCLUSION

[48]

For the above reasons, I stay the action in Ontario until further order of this court.

[49] If the parties cannot agree about the matter of costs, they may make submissions inwriting beginning with Bayer’s submissions within 20 days of the release of these Reasons forDecision followed by Ms. Babin’s submissions within a further 20 days.
_____________________
Perell, J.
Released: May 25, 2017

warning in the Canadian product monograph and the U.S. product monograph, is imperiled bywant of evidence. Moreover, there are techniques to obtain discovery evidence from third partiesin appropriate cases. In other words, there is no reason to favour Ontario as the forumconveniens.

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
KIMBERLEY BABIN
Plaintiff
– and –

BAYER INC., BAYER PHARMA AG, and BAYER OY

DefendantsREASONS FOR DECISION
PERELL J.

Released: May 25, 2017

CITATION: Babin v. Bayer Inc., 2017 ONSC 3200
COURT FILE NO.: CV-13-482667CP
DATE: 20170525

