SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE – ONTARIO
IN THE MATTER OF THE ESTATE OF MARY KATHLEEN KUKLIS, DeceasedRE:

THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA TRUST COMPANY, in its capacity as EstateTrustee During Litigation of the ESTATE OF MARY KATHLEEN KUKLIS,deceasedApplicantAND
MARTIN ANTHONY KUKLIS, KARLA ANNE SHAWN KUKLIS and THE
OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC GUARDIAN AND TRUSTEE
Respondents

BEFORE:

Madam Justice Sylvia Corthorn

COUNSEL: Kathleen McDormand, Counsel for the ApplicantSheri Thompson and Dagney Benton, Counsel for the Respondent, MartinAnthony KuklisKarla Anne Shawn Kuklis, self-representedGary H. Luftspring, Counsel for Wesley Ellis and Shawna EllisHEARD:

By written submissionsCOSTS ENDORSEMENT

Overview

[1]
This ruling with respect to costs follows an application by the Bank of Nova Scotia, in itscapacity as the Estate Trustee During Litigation of the Estate of Mary Kathleen Kuklis (the
“ETDL” and the “Estate”), with respect to (a) the sale of real property in Ontario (the “OntarioProperty”), (b) the disposition, through a sale or otherwise, of the personal property of MaryKathleen Kuklis (the “Deceased”), and (c) the production of documents from Martin Kuklis
(“Martin”), who was for a period of time the Deceased’s attorney for property.

CITATION: Bank of Nova Scotia v. Kuklis, 2017 ONSC 3069
COURT FILE NO.: CV-16-0289-00
DATE: 2017/05/29

[2]
The Deceased was the mother of both individual respondents to this application  KarlaAnne Shawna Kuklis (“Karla”) and Martin. In a proceeding separate from the application beforethe Court at this time, Karla challenged the validity of two wills said to have been executed bythe Deceased – one in June 2009 and another in July 2010. The ETDL was appointed in thecontext of that proceeding.

[3]
This application by the EDTL was initially opposed by Martin. He withdrew hisopposition on the final business day prior to the date on which the application was returnablebefore the Court.

[4]
Initially, Karla consented to the relief sought with respect to the Ontario Property.
However, she ultimately opposed the sale of the Ontario Property as proposed by the ETDL. Herstated reason for doing so was that she wanted a family member, her son Wesley Kuklis
(“Wesley”), to have an opportunity to purchase the Ontario Property. Karla was self-representedand made submissions on the return of the application.

[5]
Shawna Ellis (“Shawna”) and Wesley Kuklis (“Wesley”) are not named as respondents tothe application. They are Karla’s adult children. They were each served with the applicationrecord because they fall within the category of “[a]ny person who appears to have a financialinterest in [the Estate].”1 They are identified as beneficiaries under at least one of the two willsin dispute. As a result, and pursuant to rule 75.06(1) of the Rules of Civil Procedure2 , it wasmandatory for the ETDL to serve the application record on each of Shawna and Wesley. Afterbeing served with the application record, they retained counsel jointly.

[6]
Shawna and Wesley initially consented to the proposed sale of the Ontario Property. OnSunday, October 2, 2016 (the day prior to the return date for the application), Shawna andWesley informed the ETDL that they opposed the relief sought with respect to the OntarioProperty. That communication was effected, by email, from counsel for Shawna and Wesley tocounsel for the ETDL. Shawna’s and Wesley’s respective interests were the same as theirmother’s  for Wesley to have an opportunity to purchase the Ontario Property.

[7]
On October 3, 2016, I heard submissions on behalf of the ETDL, on behalf of Martin, andfrom Karla personally. Shawna and Wesley were not represented on the return of the motion anddid not attend personally.

[8]
Following argument, the parties reached a settlement of the application. The order madepursuant to the settlement reached includes terms that provide for:

1
2

Rule 75.06(1) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194.
Ibid.

~2~

~3~

a) The sale of the Ontario Property;

c) The production by Martin of documents related to the Estate, including those withrespect to his management of the Deceased’s assets during the period in which he wasthe attorney for property for the Deceased; andd) The method by which various documents are to be served on individuals entitled toservice of documents related to the administration of the Estate.

[9]
The settlement reached did not include terms as to costs of the application. In myendorsement, the parties were given a limited period of time within which to resolve the issue ofcosts. Deadlines were set for the delivery of costs submissions in the event an agreement withrespect to costs was not reached.

[10] The issue of costs was not resolved. I received written submissions on behalf of each ofthe ETDL, Martin, and Shawna and Wesley (the latter two individuals, jointly). I did not receivecosts submissions from Karla or on her behalf.

[11] In summary, the respective positions of the parties and individuals who delivered costssubmissions are as follows:

The ETDL seeks full indemnification of its costs of the application, with the costs paidout of the Estate. The EDTL also requests that each of Martin, Karla, Wesley, andShawna reimburse the Estate, from their respective shares of the Estate, a portion ofthe costs paid from the Estate to the EDTL. The costs order proposed is described bythe EDTL as a ‘blended order.’ The full indemnity costs sought by the EDTL are inthe amount of $28,918.92 (inclusive of fees, disbursements, and HST).

Martin acknowledges that the ETDL is entitled to some measure of costs. However,he submits that the ETDL is entitled to costs on a partial indemnity basis. The amountproposed by Martin is $11,316.34 (inclusive of fees, disbursements, and HST). Inaddition, Martin submits that there is no basis for an award of costs against himpersonally.

Shawna and Wesley seek their costs of the application in the amount of $1,500 plusHST and payable out of the Estate. Their position is that they should not be heldpersonally responsible for any portion of the costs paid from the Estate to the EDTL.

b) The disposition, through sale or otherwise, of some of the Deceased’s personalproperty;

~4~

[12] For a period of time in 2009 and 2010, Martin acted as the attorney for property for theDeceased. He was removed from that function by way of an order of this Court in November2010. Thereafter, the Public Guardian and Trustee managed the assets of the Deceased until herdeath in 2012.

[13] In April 2013, an order was made, in the context of the proceeding with respect to thevalidity of the wills, pursuant to which (a) the ETDL was appointed, (b) the ETDL was directedto compel the production of financial records with respect to the assets held solely or jointly bythe Deceased, and (c) Martin was directed to pass his accounts, as the attorney for property, forthe relevant period (the “April 2013 Order”). There is no evidence that Martin ever passed hisaccounts as directed by the April 2013 Order.

[14] The evidence of the ETDL is that since the April 2013 Order was made it has haddifficulty securing Martin’s co-operation in the production of the relevant financial records. As aresult, the EDTL has been hampered in its efforts to administer the Estate including, for example,payment of the Estate’s liabilities.

[15] The evidence of the ETDL is that as of the date on which the notice of application wasissued, the liabilities of the Estate were $142,000 – more than 15 times the cash then available inthe Estate ($6,400). The ETDL obtained appraisals for each of the Ontario Property andproperty in Calgary, the latter also owned by the Deceased (the “Alberta Property”). Based onthe appraisals, the ETDL believes that the total fair market value of the two properties is
$510,000.

[16] The appraisal obtained by the ETDL for the Ontario Property is in the amount of
$145,000. That property is described by the ETDL as a “seasonal cottage located in a remotearea south of Algonquin Park.”3 Taking into consideration income tax, real estate commission,and legal fees associated with the sale of the Ontario Property, the position of the ETDL was thatthe sale of the Ontario Property (i.e. without the sale of the Alberta Property) would not generatesufficient funds to pay the liabilities of the Estate.

[17] In the notice of application, it is specifically identified that the sale of the AlbertaProperty would be addressed in a separate proceeding in the Alberta Court of Queen’s Bench.

3

Affidavit of Leslie-Ann Buchanan sworn on July 18, 2016, at para. 56.

Background

[18] In response to the application, Martin delivered a 29-paragraph affidavit, with 11
exhibits. The affidavit was sworn on September 22, 2016 – slightly less than two weeks prior tothe return of the application. In the affidavit, Martin addressed his management of theDeceased’s assets, difficulties he alleges that he encountered in securing documents to permithim to pass his accounts, and reasons why he believes that neither of the Ontario Property andthe Alberta Property should be sold. At least ten paragraphs of Martin’s affidavit relate solely tothe Alberta Property.

[19]
said:

In the only paragraph of his affidavit in which Martin addressed the Ontario Property, heI am not agreeable to either property being sold at this time as I
believe the sale is premature. There may not be the tax liabilitiesthat Scotia Trust is expecting, Scotia Trust may be successful atgetting back the penalties that have already been paid to RevenueCanada and there is at least $15,000 still being held by the PGT.

[20] Martin’s responding record is identified as having been filed with the Court onSeptember 27, 2016.
As noted above, on Sunday, October 2, 2016, through emailcommunication between counsel, the EDTL was informed that Martin no longer opposed theapplication.

[21] No responding materials were filed on behalf of Shawna and Wesley. Karla did not fileany responding materials.
The Issues

[22] There is no dispute that the EDTL is entitled to costs of the application. The issues to bedetermined are as follows:
1. Is a ‘blended order’ with respect to costs appropriate in the circumstances of thiscase? If so, which, if any, of Martin, Karla, Shawna, and Wesley are personallyresponsible for the costs incurred by the EDTL?
2. On what scale are the EDTL’s costs of the application to be fixed?
3. Taking into consideration the applicable scale, what are the reasonable costs of theEDTL on the application?
4. Are Shawna and Wesley entitled to their costs of the application?

~5~

~6~

Issue No. 1 – ‘Blended Order’

[23] The EDTL relies on the 2014 decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal in Sawdon Estatev. Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Canada 4 in support of its request for a ‘blended’ orderas to costs. In upholding the decision of the trial judge to make a blended order, Gillese J.
referred to the 1991 decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in Goodman Estate v. Geffen5 .

[24] In Goodman, Wilson J. (as she then was) “reiterated the long-standing principle thatestate trustees are entitled to indemnified for all reasonably incurred costs, including legalcosts.”6 Wilson J. quoted with approval from a decision of the English Chancery Division:
In so far as [an estate trustee] does not recover his costs from anyperson, he is entitled to take his costs out of the fund held by himunless the court otherwise orders; and the court can otherwiseorder only on the ground that he has acted unreasonably, or insubstance for his own benefit, rather than for the benefit of thefund.7

[25] It is clear from the decision in Sawdon that the modern approach with respect to costsawards in estate litigation is to avoid the potential depletion of the estate through litigation.
Depletion of the estate is avoided by applying the ‘loser pays’ principle, as developed in thecontext of civil litigation, and thereafter requiring that the balance, if any, of the estate trustee’sreasonable costs be paid from the Estate.8

[26] The EDTL proposes that it be fully indemnified from the Estate and then one or more ofMartin, Karla, Shawna, and Wesley be required to reimburse the Estate from their respectiveshare(s) of the Estate. In my view, the approach proposed by the EDTL is the reverse of whatwas done in Sawdon and of what is contemplated by a ‘blended’ order as to costs in estatelitigation. My interpretation of the process outlined in Sawdon is as follows:

4
5
6
7
8

The first step is to determine which, if any, individual is personally liable for the costsof an estate trustee.

The second step is to determine the scale and quantum of costs to which the estatetrustee is entitled and the apportionment of those costs as between the individualsadverse to the estate trustee.

2014 ONCA 101, 119 O.R. (3d) 81, [Sawdon].

[1991] 2 S.C.R. 353, [Goodman].
Sawdon, at para. 82.
Dallaway, Re , [1982] 3 All E.R. 118, at p. 122 as quoted in Sawdon, at para. 82
Sawdon, at para. 96.

a) Generally

~7~

[27]

The final step is to determine whether the circumstances warrant a blended order. Ifso, then the difference, if any, between the estate trustee’s full reasonable costs andthe costs awarded against one or more of the individuals adverse to the estate is to bepaid from the estate.
I apply that process in sections (b) and (c) immediately below.

b) Personal Responsibility for the EDTL’s Costsi) Martin

[28] In my view, Martin’s conduct with respect to the Deceased’s property has for some timebeen problematic. I consider, for example, the following:

Martin’s failure to pass accounts for the period during which he was the Deceased’sattorney for property. That failure has persisted since at least the April 2013 Order,when Martin was ordered by this Court to pass accounts, if not from 2010 when hewas removed as attorney for property.

The failure on Martin’s part to properly administer the Deceased’s assets andliabilities when he was the attorney for property has served to make it more difficultthan it would otherwise have been for the EDTL to administer the Estate.

Despite his long-standing failure to produce relevant documents, Martin was criticalof the EDTL for what Martin perceives to be a failure on the EDTL’s part toappreciate the true potential value of the Estate and the potential to preserve theAlberta Property and potentially the Ontario Property.

In responding to the application, Martin’s focus was clearly the Alberta Property. Hisefforts were directed to preventing the EDTL from selling that property. Hisresponding materials made minimal reference to the Ontario Property.

[29] I find that Martin’s conduct, in particular with respect to this application, was motivatedby self-interest including his desire to preserve the Alberta Property for his benefit. I find thatthe intention of the EDTL to deal with the Alberta Property separately in a proceeding in thatprovince is clearly set out in the notice of application. As a result, to a large extent much ofMartin’s evidence was relevant to the Alberta proceeding and minimally relevant, if at all, to theapplication before this Court.

[30] I find that by reason of his conduct over time, including with respect to his obligations asan attorney for property, Martin prevented the EDTL from fulfilling its obligation to properlyadminister the Estate. I find that the further result of Martin’s conduct is that the liabilities of theEstate are higher than they would otherwise have been. Those liabilities are higher specifically

~8~

because of the delays in the administration of the Estate resulting from Martin’s behaviour.
In summary, Martin’s conduct supports an award of costs against him personally.

[32] I agree with the EDTL that Martin’s affidavit is replete with evidence as to his precariousfinancial position. On the basis of that evidence I find that there is a more than reasonablepossibility that Martin does not have the ability to pay the costs awarded against him other thanfrom his share of the Estate. Therefore the costs awarded against Martin are to be paid first fromhis share of the Estate, with Martin remaining personally liable for the balance, if any, thenowed.
ii) Karla, Shawna, and Wesley

[33] I find that Karla, Shawna and Wesley were, at a minimum, naive in their approach to theOntario Property. It was clear from the submissions made by Karla that she and her childrenfailed, with respect to the Ontario Property, to appreciate that (a) nothing prevented Wesley frommaking an offer to purchase once an order for sale was made, (b) the EDTL has an obligation inthe administration of the Estate to secure a reasonable purchase price, and (c) the EDTL is not ina position to ‘discount’ the sale price for the benefit of a particular potential purchaser.

[34] It was not until long after the notice of application was issued that one or more of Karla,Shawna, and Wesley took a position on the application that precluded the matter fromproceeding on consent. I find that it was Martin’s initial position which drove the EDTL to issuethe notice of application and set the matter down for a hearing. It was not until September 30,2016 that Martin’s position changed and he consented to the relief sought. It was on October 2,2016 that Wesley and Shawna withdrew their support for the relief requested.

[35] The vast majority of the work on the application was complete before one or more ofKarla, Shawna, and Wesley withdrew their support for the relief requested. I find that theirconduct does not warrant an award of costs against them.
c) Payment of Costs from the Estate

[36] For the reasons set out above in sections (a) and (b), I find that the EDTL had noalternative but to proceed with the application, and the costs incurred for the application werereasonably necessary, to ensure the proper administration of the Estate. As a result, the EDTL isentitled to payment from the Estate of the difference between its reasonable full indemnity costsand the costs for which Martin is responsible. 9

9

See Feinstein v. Freedman, 2014 ONCA 205, 2014 CarswellOnt 3874, at para. 51, as quoted in Bryant v.
Bryant Estate, 2015 ONSC 1853, 2015 CarswellOnt 3847, at para. 43.

[31]

~9~

Issue No. 2 – Scale of Costs

Issue No. 3 – Quantum of Costsa) Position of the EDTL

[38] In the bill of costs submitted by the EDTL the full indemnity costs are broken down asfollows:
Fees

$ 23,464.50

HST on Fees

$

3,050.39

Fees (appearance)

$

1,050.00

HST on Fees

$

136.50

Disbursements

$

1,098.28

HST on Disbursements

$

119.25

Total

$ 28,918.92

[39] In support of the amount requested for costs, the EDTL asks the Court to consider thefollowing:

10

The hourly rate for all timekeepers is charged at a reduced amount. Each hourly rateis reduced by 10 per cent from the usual rate charged. For example, the hourly rate atwhich senior counsel’s time is charged is $350 – a reduction of slightly more than 10
per cent from her full rate of $390.

In preparation for the return of the application it was necessary to update the originalapplication record. In the end, the materials filed on behalf of the EDTL included theapplication record, three supplementary records, a factum, and a book of authorities.
In addition, it was necessary for counsel for the EDTL to review the affidavitmaterials delivered by Martin.

See Hunt v. TD Securities Inc. (2003), 66 O.R. (3d) 481, [2003] O.J. No. 3245 (C.A.), at p. 509.

[37] I find that Martin’s conduct, including as described in paragraphs 28 and 29, above, fallswithin the type of reprehensible conduct that warrants an award of costs against him on asubstantial indemnity basis.10

It was specifically as a result of the failure of Martin to fulfil his obligations asattorney for property and to comply with the April 2013 Order that the EDTL
obtained information over time, including after the initial supporting affidavit wasdelivered. The preparation of the three supplemental application records was requiredto ensure that the Court had up-to-date evidence as to the Estate’s assets and liabilitiesand as to the steps required to complete the administration of the Estate.

[40] The EDTL also made submissions with respect to the factors identified in rule 57.07(1)
of the Rules of Civil Procedure11 . That aspect of the EDTL’s submissions is discussed in theanalysis in section (c) below.
b) Martin’s Position

[41]

Martin’s position is that the that the application was “simple”, the amount of timeincurred (91 hours in total) on behalf of the EDTL is excessive whether considered in isolation orwhen measured against the time spent on the matter by Martin’s counsel, the hourly rate chargedby senior counsel for the EDTL is well beyond Martin’s reasonable expectations, and the amountclaimed for fees is well beyond Martin’s reasonable expectations. 12

[42] Martin acknowledges that it is reasonable that the time spent on behalf of the EDTL wasmore than the time spent by his counsel. However, Martin submits that a reasonable amount oftime is double the amount spent by his counsel  not triple that amount as is reflected in theEDTL’s bill of costs.

[43]

Martin does not dispute the amount claimed by the EDTL for disbursements.

c) Analysis

[44] I turn first to the factors outlined in rule 57.07(1) of the Rules of Civil Procedure.13 I
agree with the submissions on behalf of the EDTL and make the following findings. First, thefees incurred in seeking directions with respect to an estate which has a potential value estimatedat $640,000 are reasonable. Second, the proceeding was made more complex by virtue of thechanges over time in the positions respectively of Martin, Karla, Shawna, and Wesley. Thecomplexity of the proceeding was also affected by reason of the difficulties encountered by theEDTL in collecting information and the requirement to file supplemental affidavits.

11
12
13

Supra, footnote 1.
Submissions with respect to costs on behalf of Martin Kuklis, paras. 16-18.
Supra, footnote 1.

~ 10 ~

[45] Third, the issues were of importance because without directions from the Court, inparticular with respect to the sale of the Ontario Property, the liabilities of the Estate would havecontinued to increase. There would have been further depletion of the value of the Estate. It wasalso important that the EDTL obtain directions from the Court to facilitate the cost-effective andefficient service of documents on the putative beneficiaries of the Estate.

[46] Lastly, Martin’s opposition to the relief requested and last-minute reversal of thatopposition constitute (a) conduct that lengthened the proceeding, and (b) a refusal to admitsomething that should have been admitted, namely that the Ontario Property must be sold.

[47] I am satisfied that the hourly rates charged by all timekeepers are reasonable, in particulargiven that they are reduced by 10 per cent from the full rates usually charged. I am, however,concerned about overlap between the work done by each of the articling student (13.3 hours),associate counsel (24.6 hours), and senior counsel (45.2 hours). I find that a reduction of 15 percent of the time entered for each of the student, associate counsel, and senior counsel isreasonable.

[48] In my view, it is not reasonable to draw a comparison between the time spent by counselfor Martin and the time spent by counsel for the EDTL. The nature, complexity, and volume ofwork done by each are sufficiently different to preclude such a comparison being meaningful inthis analysis.

[49] Taking into consideration all of the above, I fix the full indemnity fees and substantialindemnity fees of the EDTL as follows:
Full

Substantial14

Senior counsel

$ 13,447.00

$ 12,102.30

Associate counsel

$

4,077.45

$

3,669.71

Clerks

$

1,185.00

$

1,066.50

Articling student

$

1,413.13

$

1,271.82

Total

$ 20,122.58

$ 18,110.33

[50] To those amounts, the total for disbursements (including HST) and HST on fees areadded as follows:

14

Substantial indemnity fees are calculated using the following formula – Full Indemnity Fees x 0.6 x 1.5

~ 11 ~

Full

Substantial

Fees

$ 20,122.58

$ 18,110.33

HST on fees

$

2,615.94

$

2,354.35

Disbursements

$

1,098.28

$

1,098.28

HST on Disbursements

$

119.25

$

119.25

Total

$ 23,956.05

$ 21,682.20

[51] In summary, the EDTL’s full indemnity costs are fixed in the amount of $23,956.05 andsubstantial indemnity costs in the amount of $21,682.20.
Issue No. 4 – Shawna and Wesley

[52] In this section of the endorsement, I refer to Shawna and Wesley collectively as “thegrandchildren.” There are internal inconsistencies in the costs submissions delivered on behalfof the grandchildren. First, it is acknowledged that they were under no obligation to respond tothe application, to consent to the relief requested, or to oppose the relief requested. I agree withthe grandchildren in that regard.

[53] It is also submitted by the grandchildren that the application was necessitated by the
“actions and inactions of Martin Kuklis in not responding to the Estate Trustee, which actionsand inactions are set out in the [application record].”15 Again, I agree with the grandchildren.

[54] The grandchildren next submit that, “[h]aving been served, Wesley and Shawna wereforced to retain counsel to review the material and advise them.” In that regard, I disagree withthe grandchildren.

[55] The grandchildren were served with the application record pursuant to rule 75.06(1) ofthe Rules of Civil Procedure16 because, as potential beneficiaries, they appear to have a financialinterest in the Estate. The EDTL did nothing more than comply with the Rules of CivilProcedure related to contentious estate proceedings. It was entirely up to the grandchildren todetermine what steps, if any, they would take in response to the application.

15
16

Costs submissions of the grandchildren, at para. 5.
Supra, footnote 1.

~ 12 ~

[56] The fact that the grandchildren chose to retain counsel to review the application recorddoes not in and of itself entitle them to costs on the application. There is no evidence that theysought to become involved in the application by filing materials or by requesting that they beadded as parties to the proceeding.17 Counsel for the grandchildren chose to rely on counsel forthe Estate to advise the Court, on the return of the application, of his clients’ position.

[57] I find that Shawna and Wesley are not entitled to their costs in this matter. Their requestfor same is dismissed.
Summary

[58]

In summary, I order as follows:

1. The Applicant shall have its costs of the application on a substantial indemnity basis in theamount of $21,560.45 and for which the respondent, Martin Kuklis is solely responsible.
2. The substantial indemnity costs for which Martin Kuklis is solely responsible shall be paidfrom his share of the Estate of Mary Kathleen Kuklis (the “Estate”) and, in the event MartinKuklis’ share of the Estate is insufficient to pay the substantial indemnity costs awardedMartin Kuklis shall be personally responsible for the balance of the substantial indemnitycosts.
3. The full indemnity costs of the Applicant are fixed in the amount of $23,956.05.
4. The Applicant shall be paid from the Estate the difference between the full indemnity costsand the substantial indemnity costs, that difference being $2,273.85.
5. The order with respect to costs bears post-judgment interest from the date of this ruling andin accordance with the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43 as amended.

____________________________________
Madam Justice Sylvia CorthornDate: May 29, 2017

17

Rule 75.06(3)(b) of the Rules of Civil Procedure provides that the Court may, on an application of the kindbrought by the EDTL, direct who the parties are and who shall be served with the order for directions etc.

~ 13 ~

CITATION: Bank of Nova Scotia v. Kuklis, 2017 ONSC 3069
COURT FILE NO.: CV-16-0289-00
DATE: 2017/05/29

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
IN THE MATTER OF THE ESTATE OF MARY
KATHLEEN KUKLIS, DeceasedRE:

THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA
TRUST COMPANY, in its capacity asEstate Trustee During Litigation of theESTATE OF MARY KATHLEEN
KUKLIS, deceasedApplicantAND
MARTIN ANTHONY KUKLIS,KARLA ANNE SHAWN KUKLIS andTHE OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC
GUARDIAN AND TRUSTEE
Respondents

BEFORE:

Madam Justice Sylvia Corthorn

COUNSEL: Kathleen McDormand, Counsel for theApplicantSheri Thompson and Dagney Benton,Counsel for the Respondent, MartinAnthony KuklisKarla Anne Shawn Kuklis, selfrepresentedGary H. Luftspring, Counsel for WesleyEllis and Shawna Ellis

COSTS ENDORSEMENT

Madam Justice Sylvia Corthorn

ONTARIO

~2~

Released: May 29, 2017

