ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

BERKLEY INSURANCE COMPANY
Applicant )
– and –
ROB PIROLI CONSTRUCTION INC.
Respondent )

Sonny Ingram for the Applicant

Myron W. Shulgan, Q.C. for the Respondent

HEARD: May 18, 2017

PERELL, J.
REASONS FOR DECISION

[1]
To obtain construction bonds for a building project, the Respondent, Rob PiroliConstruction Inc. (“Piroli Construction”), the general contractor, undertook to the Applicant,Berkley Insurance Company, that it would direct certain funds from the owner of the building tobe held in trust to be available to indemnify it if the bonds were triggered. Piroli Construction didnot honour its undertaking, and Berkley Insurance brings this application for a mandatory ordercompelling it to do so.

[2]
The factual background to this application is that in late 2012-early 2013, the Town ofLaSalle hired Piroli Construction as a general contractor to build a municipal building.

[3]
The building was constructed, and between November 2014 and January 2015, BerkleyInsurance agreed to post construction lien bonds for Piroli Construction to vacate constructionliens claims of $972,876.38 that had been registered by eight subcontractors; namely: (1) D & M
Glass and Mirror Ltd., $142,245; (2) Acapulco Pools Ltd., $92,375; (3) Nadalin Custom FloorsLtd., $63,968; (4) Ground Effects Ltd., $71,060; (5) Aztec Electrical Supply Ltd., $347,790; (6)
Poirier Electric Ltd., $34,958.71; (7) Rene G. Roy & Sons, $182,912.84; and (8) FranklinTerrazzo Company Ltd., $37,566.83.

[4]
To obtain the bonds, Rob Piroli and his wife, Lucy Piroli, agreed to indemnify BerkleyInsurance for any losses it suffered from posting the lien bonds. As additional security, shouldBerkley Insurance be called on to pay on the construction lien bonds, Piroli Constructionundertook that it would direct the Town of LaSalle to pay $486,154 to Robert G. Millson

CITATION: Berkley Insurance Company v. Rob Piroli Construction Inc., 2017 ONSC 3145
COURT FILE NO.: CV-15-526959
DATE: 20170525

2

[5]
Piroli Construction, however, breached its undertaking to Berkley Insurance. It received
$486,154 from the Town but did not make the directions, and, instead, it used the money to paysubcontractors. Piroli Construction did not direct any funds to be paid pursuant to theundertaking it made to Berkley Insurance, and Mr. Piroli testified that although his company andassociated companies have assets, the company does not now have any money to pay BerkleyInsurance.

[6]
Piroli Construction says that it settled the lien claims of Ground Effects Ltd., PoirierElectric Ltd., and Franklin Terrazzo Company Ltd. However, it has provided no evidence in thisregard, and save for one lien bond, the lien bonds have not been returned to Berkley Insurancefor cancellation.

[7]
To date, no call has been made on the construction lien bonds, but Berkley Insuranceseeks to enforce the undertaking. It submitted that there were no material facts in dispute and thatit is entitled to a final or permanent mandatory injunction, in effect, an order for specificperformance requiring Piroli Construction to honour its undertaking.

[8]
In the alternative, Berkley Insurance submits that it is entitled to a mandatoryinterlocutory injunction compelling Piroli Construction to honour its undertaking. It submits thatit has: (1) demonstrated a strong prima facie case, (2) shown that there would be irreparableharm if the mandatory injunction were not granted, and (3) has shown that the balance ofconvenience favours granting the injunction. If necessary, Berkley Insurance said it wouldprovide the normal undertaking as to damages.

[9]
Piroli Construction resists the motion and although it admits that it breached itsundertaking to have money paid into trust as security for the lien claims, Piroli Constructionsubmits that Berkley Insurance is not entitled to an order akin to specific performance becausedamages are an adequate remedy.

[10] Further, Piroli Construction submits that Berkley Insurance has not satisfied the test for amandatory interlocutory injunction because it cannot show irreparable harm and it has failed toprovide an undertaking as to damages. Piroli Construction submitted that Berkley Insurancecould not demonstrate irreparable harm, because it could not show that the common law remedyof damages for breach of contract was inadequate to do justice and, therefore, the equitableremedy of a mandatory injunction was not justified and should not be granted.

[11] I agree with the submissions of Berkley Insurance. If this matter is viewed as a claim forspecific performance of its contract with Piroli Construction, then damages are indeed aninadequate remedy. The inadequacy of damages in the immediate case can be demonstrated.
Visualize: if Berkley Insurance were awarded a judgment for damages, then it would hold themas an unsecured judgment creditor for its claim to be indemnified. A judgment for damages is anunsecured claim. In contrast, if the undertaking is honoured then Berkley Insurance is a securedcreditor to the extent that it has a right to be indemnified. It is the beneficiary of a trust.
Practically speaking, Berkley Insurance would have priority over the unsecured creditors.

Professional Corporation, Piroli Construction’s lawyers, and that it would direct MillsonProfessional Corporation to forward $191,000 to Berkley Insurance and to retain the balance intrust to be available to indemnify Berkley Insurance should a demand be made for payment ofthe construction lien bonds.

3

[13]
Accordingly, I grant Berkley Insurance the requested order plus costs fixed at $12,000
for this hearing and for the prior hearing in this matter (about the procedure for this application;see Berkley Insurance Company v. Rob Piroli Construction Inc., 2016 ONSC 990, rev’d 2016
ONCA 885).
_____________________
Perell, J.
Released: May 25, 2017

[12] I parenthetically note that this phenomena that specific performance is a secured claimmay also be observed where a purchaser of land sues a bankrupt vendor for specific performanceand thereby achieves a secured judgment worth the value of the land as opposed to an unsecuredjudgment for damages. The purchaser pays the purchase price which goes to the estate inbankruptcy but the purchaser, practically speaking, gets full value and not an unsecured debt.

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
BERKLEY INSURANCE COMPANY
Applicant
– and –
ROB PIROLI CONSTRUCTION INC.
RespondentREASONS FOR DECISION
PERELL J.

Released: May 25, 2017

CITATION: Berkley Insurance Company v. Rob Piroli Construction Inc., 2017 ONSC 3145
COURT FILE NO.: CV-15-526959
DATE: 20170525

