CITATION: Boodhoo v. Persaud, 2017 ONSC 2920
COURT FILE NO.: 01-1123/07
DATE: 20170511

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO
B E T W E E N:
DIANE BOODHOO and DIANE BOODHOO
as estate trustee of the ESTATE OF ALICIA
BOODHOO
Plaintiffs
– and –
THAKUR (JOHN) PERSUAD and SURUJDAI
(SHANTI) PERSAUD,DefendantBEFORE:

F.L. Myers, J.

COUNSEL: Robert P. Sullivan and Wade Morris, counsel for the PlaintiffJujhar Mangat, counsel for the DefendantsMark M. Persaud, incoming counsel for the DefendantsHEARD:

May 11, 2017
ENDORSEMENT

[1] On April 25, 2017 I heard a scheduling conference in court.
conference to refine the schedule to see this old matter through to trial.

I ordered a further case

[2] In this action, the plaintiff, as estate trustee of the estate of her late mother, seeks anaccounting of her mothers’ estate from her uncle Thakur Persaud. Thakur Persaud previouslywas the estate trustee under the mother’s will. The co-defendant is the spouse of ThakurPersaud. The plaintiff alleges that the defendants have wrongfully dealt with and taken estateassets.

[3] The defendants are not beneficiaries under the will. The deceased owed a debt to Mr.Persaud that was to be repaid under the will. Otherwise, the beneficiaries are the children of thedeceased. Despite relying on the will to have himself appointed as estate trustee, Mr. Peraudnow alleges that the will was forged by the plaintiff. If that is so, then the ensuing intestacy willstill leave the defendants bound to account for their conduct or misconduct and will continue tosee the children of the deceased as the beneficiaries (although in different proportions than under

the will). The defendants are adamant that they now wish to move to remove the plaintiff asestate trustee due to the forgery issue. That may lead to a replacement of the plaintiff by anEstate Trustee During Litigation. But it will not have any effect on the substantive issues in thisaction.

[4] If the defendants decide to bring some form of motion for interlocutory relief before trial,they are to deliver their motion record to counsel for the plaintiff and then counsel for all partieswill convene a case conference by telephone through my office to discuss scheduling issues.

[5] In the meantime, the action is to proceed. The defendants have been through severalcounsel to date. Mr. Mangat advises that his instructions are to cease acting after the currentcase conference. Mr. Mark M. Persaud was on the call and advised that he expects to be retainedby the defendants imminently.

[6] By order dated July 5, 2012, on consent, Stinson J. replaced Mr. Thakur Persaud with Ms.Boodhoo as estate trustee. Para. 2 of the order made by Stinson J. provided:
2.
THIS COURT ORDERS, on consent, that Thakur Persaud shall deliver, on orbefore September 7, 2012, a full accounting of his administration of the Estate of AliciaBoodhoo from the date of his appointment to the date herein.

[7]

Thakur Persaud has not complied with Justice Stinson’s order.

[8]

On October 5, 2012, Stevenson J. made an order containing the following terms:
3.
THIS COURT ORDERS, Mr. Persaud shall deliver an accounting of hisadministration of the estate when he was estate trustee that complies with the accountingrequirements set out in the Rules of Civil Procedure.
5.
THIS COURT ORDERS that Mr. Persaud shall deliver all documents andrecords pertaining to the estate within his control within 30 days.

[9] Thakur Persaud has not complied with either of these terms. He has not delivered therequired accounting. He has not delivered to the estate trustee all or any documents and recordspertaining to the administration of the estate as he was required to do by November 4, 2012
almost five years ago.

[10] Neither of the defendants has delivered affidavits of documents despite the close ofpleadings.

[11] Mr. Mangat agrees that his clients are required and have been required to turn over to theestate trustee all documents relating to the estate administration. His excuse for his clients’
failure to comply with two court orders and the law is that in March of this year he retained aforensic accountant to provide a form of accounting as required. The accountant wrote in Marchthat he required until the end of the first week of June to deliver a report. Mr. Mangat advises

-2-

that he had discussions with the plaintiff’s counsel concerning the qualifications for a forensicexpert and he took from this that the accounting was to take precedence. The plaintiff’s counseldeny the conversations alleged. I will not engage in that debate.

[12] Regardless of what was said between counsel, the retainer of an expert in March, 2017
does not address at all the defendants’ non-compliance from September, 2012 to that time.
Moreover, if documents were compiled for the expert, there is no reason why copies of at leastthose documents could not have been given to the plaintiff at the same time. Furthermore, thedefendants’ allegations concerning forgery do not, as yet, overcome the existence of the order ofStinson J., to which they consented, that appointed Ms. Boodhoo as the lawful estate trusteeunless or until that situation is changed. The order made by Stevenson J. also remainsoutstanding unless or until it is set aside or amended. The fact that the defendants arechallenging the will which they propounded and under which Mr. Persaud was able to takecontrol of the assets of the estate is certainly worthy of note. But nothing said by Mr. Mangatexcuses his clients’ failure to perform their obligations as ordered by the court twice and at law.

[13] The defendants’ ongoing procedural delays, including counsel’s refusals to bookexaminations for discovery, the defendants’ frequent changes of counsel, and their noncompliance with orders make it essential that this old action now be case managed to trial withsome determination and a sense of urgency.

[14] The defendants’ possible new counsel, Mr. Mark Persaud, expressed concern with theunexplained delays and undertook that once retained he will move this action as expeditiously aspossible toward trial. That is a very positive approach. If Mr. Mark Persaud is retained, I expectthat counsel for all parties will cooperate on scheduling matters. Mr. Persaud asks for some timeto get up to speed and prepare the defendants’ affidavits of documents. He agrees that in theinterim there is no reason to hold up producing to the plaintiff at least the documents that thedefendants gave to their expert. Mr. Mangat asks that nothing be required of the defendantsbefore their expert’s report is expected at the end of the first week of June.

[15] In my view the expert report is a red herring. It can be delivered before trial subject to thetime limits in the Rules and below. It has no bearing on the compliance with court orders by thedefendants or the progress of the action generally. Mr. Mark Persaud is entitled to a few weeksto get up to speed on the file as he requests. Whether documents are produced before then andwhether whatever is done is sufficient compliance with the outstanding orders and legalobligations of the defendants will become clearer over time.

[16] Accordingly, I make the following directions under Rule 50.13:
a.

These directions apply regardless of whether the defendants bring a motion toremove the plaintiff as estate trustee;

b.

The defendants shall comply with the orders of Stinson J. and Stevenson J. made inthis proceeding forthwith;

-3-

c.

The defendants shall serve their sworn affidavits of documents on the plaintiff’scounsel before 4:30 p.m. on May 31, 2017. The defendants’ sworn affidavits shallinclude comprehensive, particularized Schedules “B” and “C.”
In addition, thedefendants shall deliver to the plaintiff’s counsel, together with their sworn affidavitsof documents, copies of all documents listed in Schedule “A” to their respectiveaffidavits of documents.

d.

Subject to counsel agreeing on different dates, Thakur Persaud shall attend forexamination for discovery on July 18, 2017 at a time and place to be set by theplaintiff’s counsel in a Notice of Examination to be served by 4:30 p.m. on July 14,2017 . Surujdai Persaud shall attend for examination for discovery on July 19, 2017
at a time and place to be set by the plaintiffs’ counsel in a Notice of Examination tobe served by 4:30 p.m. on July 14, 2017.

e.

All undertakings given at the examinations for discovery shall be answered in fullwith complete documentary backup before 4:30 p.m. on August 31, 2017.

f.

Rule 34.12 of the Rules of Civil Procedure applies to all examinations for discoveryin this action. That is, all questions to which objections are taken shall be answeredin full at the time despite the objection. The answers given to any questions to whichan objection is taken may not be used in evidence without a ruling being obtained atthe hearing or trial at which such evidence is sought to be adduced. The onlyexception to the requirement for the witness to answer questions to which objectionis taken is for questions objected to on the basis of lawyer and client privilege.
Questions that are claimed to elicit a response that offends the lawyer and clientprivilege do not need to be answered unless or until a ruling is obtained.

g.

Any expert report relied upon by the defendants for trial shall be delivered to theplaintiff’s counsel before 4:30 p.m. on June 30, 2017. If the plaintiff proposes torespond with an expert report, she must deliver her expert’s report to the defendants’
counsel before 4:30 p.m. on August 31, 2017.

h.

The parties’ pre-trial conference memoranda shall be exchanged and delivered to myAssistant by email by 4:30 p.m. on September 15, 2017.

i.

Counsel shall schedule cooperatively a pre-trial conference through my office to beheld during the last two weeks of September, 2017.

j.

As case management judge and pre-trial judge, I will not be the trial judge.

[17] The plaintiff’s counsel also asked for an order excluding the parties from each other’sexaminations and prohibiting the defendants from discussing their discovery evidence untilexaminations for discovery are completed. As the defendants had no notice of this request, Rule50.13 (6) does not anticipate the court dealing with it at this time. The parties did have notice inmy endorsement of April 25, 2017 that the purpose of the case conference would be to schedule

-4-

the remaining steps to trial as I have done above. While I greatly favour the use of summaryprocess through case conferences where appropriate, the issue of excluding parties fromexaminations for discovery is a fact-laden decision that may well require evidence that canreasonably be expected to be contested. In my view, counsel should speak to see if they canagree on a protocol to assuage the plaintiff’s concerns failing which a case conference should beconvened by telephone to discuss the process by which the issue will be resolved. This issue is agood test of new counsel’s ability to follow through on his undertaking on behalf of his putativeclients to move the case forward as expeditiously as possible.

[18] Subject to any urgent issues that may arise in the interim, the next case conference willtake place at 8:30 a.m. on June 1, 2017. My Assistant will circulate call-in particulars. If thedefendants do not have counsel on the record for them on June 1, 2017, then, instead of atelephone conference, the case conference will be held in person in courtroom 8-3, at 330
University Avenue, commencing at 9:30 a.m.

[19] Mr. Mangat is to provide a copy of this endorsement to his clients so as to put them clearlyon notice that by June 1, 2017 if the defendants have not cured their non-compliance with theorders of Stevenson J. and Stinson J. or if there is any term of this order with which they havenot complied, without a proper, lawful excuse, the court will entertain a request by the plaintiffto strike the defendants’ pleadings with costs or for other relief as may be appropriate under Rule60.12.

[20] This action is to move forward to a fair, efficient, affordable, and proportionate resolutionon its real merits wherever they lie. There will be no more delays by any party.

F.L. Myers, J.
Date: May 11, 2017

-5-

