CITATION: Campbell v Lapierre, 2017 ONSC 3017
COURT FILE NO.: FC-12-1470-1
DATE: 2017/05/29

RE:

Timothy Campbell, ApplicantAND
Isabelle Lapierre, Respondent

BEFORE:

Justice A. Doyle

COUNSEL: Steve Duplain Counsel, for the ApplicantAshish (“ASH”) Duvadie Counsel, for the RespondentHEARD:

In writingCOSTS ENDORSEMENT

[1]

After an eight day trial, the Court ordered the following:


both parents were awarded joint custody of the children with terms and conditionsregarding the parenting of the children;



neither party would attend the other party’s home without written consent of theother parent;



emails relating to major decisions for the children such as health, education,religious upbringing or extracurricular activities shall be responded to within 72
hours;



the parties would not contact each other directly or indirectly unless it pertained tothe children;



the parents would continue to meet at a neutral location for the exchange of thechildren;

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO



the Applicant father would have parenting time every second Thursday after schooluntil Tuesday morning and sharing of holidays;the father will make the best efforts to bring the children to the daycare before 8
a.m.;



the parenting arrangement will be reviewed by July 2019;



commencing January 1, 2017, the father will pay child support table amount of
$1,415 per month for the two children based on his annual income of $99,927;



commencing June 1, 2017, the parties will exchange their most recent income taxreturns and Notices of Assessment and child support and the division of s. 7
expenses will be adjusted in accordance with the Applicant’s previous year’sincome retroactive to January 1st ;



the parents will share s. 7 and special extraordinary expenses proportionate to theirrespective

incomes,

which

includes

Building Blocks program and

daycare

expenses. The father will pay 57% of the expense and the mother will pay 43% ofthe expense. No expense for which contribution is sought will be incurred withoutfirst obtaining prior written consent from the other parent, which consent shall notbe unreasonably withheld;


the father will pay to the mother half of the Child tax credit in the amount of
$632.50 by April 1, 2017;



the father will pay to the mother the amount of $470 representing a reimbursementof daycare expense and shortfall with respect to coins by April 1, 2017; and



[2]

the claim for a restraining order was dismissed.

If the parties could not agree on the issue of costs, the parties were to provide written

submissions.



[3]

After considering the parties’ written submissions, bills of costs and various offers to

settle, the Court finds that there has been divided success, hence the Court orders no costs.

[4]

The Applicant (father) is seeking partial costs in the amount of $20,000 inclusive of HST

as he was the more successful party and that the Court’s decision more closely resembles theposition he took at trial. In contrast, the Respondent (mother) sought sole custody of the childrenwith more limited access to the father and a restraining order.

[5]

The father’s offer to settle dated September 2, 2016 offered the following:
 joint custody;
 a requirement of 72 hours to respond to an email dealing with a major decisionregarding the children;
 alternate weeks parenting schedule and sharing of holidays;
 no child support;
 he would reimburse her the amount of $632.50 for the Universal Child Benefitreceived on May 2012; and $470 for his share of the remaining equalizationpayment and daycare costs;
 if the offer to settle was accepted prior to September 14, 2016, no costs, after thatdate she would pay $10,000. It revoked all previous offers to settle (whichincludes the offers listed);
 it expired one minute after the commencement of the trial; and
 this offer to settle revoked all previous offers to settle.

[6]

This offer to settle met the criteria of Rule 18(14) of the FLRs as the father signed the

offer, it was dated and served on the mother at least 7 days before the trial commenced.

Father’s position

[7]

The father also sent other offers to settle which were not open for acceptance at the time

of the trial as they were revoked by the above offer to settle.
The previous offers included one dated April 21, 2015 which offered:
 joint custody;
 if the parties could not agree on a major decision pertaining to the children within 72
hours of receiving notice, the mother would have final decision making authority;
 access would increase to every second Thursday to Tuesday morning;
 exchanges for access would take place at the children’s school;
 he would pay child support in the amount of $1,477 based on his annual income;
 the parties would have an annual exchange of tax returns;
 he offered to pay $1,265 for UCCB and $400 for half of property and $70 for daycarecosts;
 if the offer was accepted prior to the settlement conference, the mother would paycosts in the amount of $4,000 and if accepted after the settlement conference, shewould pay $8,000; and
 there would be no restraining order.

[9]

The offer to settle dated September 23, 2014, offered joint custody, access as per

separation agreement, i.e. every second Friday to Monday morning and $1,319 per month aschild support.

[10]

Another offer to settle dated December 3, 2014, offered joint custody, access the same as

set out in the separation agreement and payment of the table amount of child support of $1,383
per month.
Mother’s position

[11]

The mother is seeking $55,000 based on a partial recovery basis.

[8]

[12]

Her trial costs were $73,382.50. In addition, $10,987.03 were rendered by her previous

counsel Mr. Lazarovitz for services rendered from April 9, 2013 to June 24, 2013.
Master MacLeod (as he was then) reserved the costs of the conference to the trial Judge.

The mother states that she was successful as the Court ordered the mother’s request forpsychological support for the children.

[14]

The father was not successful in his quest for 50/50 parenting time. The final court order

supported her position that there should not be an increase of access to the children by the father.

[15]

The father refused to provide his consent for baptism for 3 years until September 2016

thereby creating costs, wasting Court time and fuelling legal conflict.

[16]

The mandatory 72 hour response to emails dealing with major decisions regarding the

children was the mother’s proposal. The father’s proposal was 30 days as suggested by Dr.Weinberger’s report.

[17]

Her December 3, 2014 offer to settle offered:
 joint custody;
 no changes to access from that stipulated in the separation agreement;
 exchange at the school or a public place and neither party attend the other party’sresidence without the other party’s consent;
 child support of $1,383 per month payable by the father;
 sharing of s. 7 special and extraordinary expenses; and
 costs consequences if not accepted by a certain timeframe.

[18]

In her September 8, 2016 settlement conference brief, the mother offered a return to the

prior schedule as set out in the separation agreement, and sole custody with the mother havingfinal decision making authority, the children could be baptized and there would be a 72-hoursresponse time to a request regarding a joint decision pertaining to the child.

[13]

[19]

Her bill of costs is not detailed. It indicates time spent of 181 hours at $250 per hour in

the amount of $42,250 plus eight trial dates at $2,500 per day for $20,000 and disbursements of

Legal Principles

[20]

The following legal principles are applicable when determining costs in a family law

matter.

[21]

Firstly, costs are discretionary.

[22]

Secondly, the Court is guided by the principles set out in Serra v. Serra, [2009] ONCA

395, at para. 8, where the Ontario Court of Appeal stated that the costs rules are designed for thefollowing fundamental purposes:

[23]

(1)

to partially indemnify successful litigants for the cost of litigation;

(2)

to encourage settlement; and

(3)

to discourage and sanction inappropriate behaviour by litigants.

Next, Rule 18(14) (15) and (16) of the Family Law Rules, O. Reg. 114/99 (the “FLRs”)

sets out the factors and costs consequences for failure to accept an offer to settle. See below.
(14) A party who makes an offer is, unless the court orders otherwise, entitled tocosts to the date the offer was served and full recovery of costs from that date, ifthe following conditions are met:
1. If the offer relates to a motion, it is made at least one day before the motiondate.
2. If the offer relates to a trial or the hearing of a step other than a motion, it ismade at least seven days before the trial or hearing date.
3. The offer does not expire and is not withdrawn before the hearing starts.
4. The offer is not accepted.
5. The party who made the offer obtains an order that is as favourable as ormore favourable than the offer.
(15) The burden of proving that the order is as favourable as or more favourablethan the offer to settle is on the party who claims the benefit of subrule (14).

$1,339.36 inclusive of HST.

(16) When the court exercises its discretion over costs, it may take into accountany written offer to settle, the date it was made and its terms, even if subrule (14)
does not apply. See Tyner v. Tyner [2015] ONSC 6566.
Also, guidance is found in the FLRs which govern cases in Family Court. Rule 24(11) of

the FLRs sets out the factors the Court shall consider in its determination of costs.

[25]

Finally, parties must ensure that they recognize the impact of Rule 24(10) of the FLRs

which provides that :
(10) Promptly after dealing with a step in the case, the court shall,
(a) make a decision on costs in relation to that step; or
(b) reserve the decision on costs for determination at a later stage inthe case.

[26]

the following regarding Rule 24(10):
We accept the appellant's submission that the trial judge erred in failing toexclude from the award of costs amounts claimed for steps taken in the casewhere no order was made as to costs or where there was silence on the issue. Rule24(10) of the Family Law Rules provides that the judge who deals with a step in acase shall decide who, if anyone, is entitled to costs. If a party who has served anoffer to settle the case as a whole wishes that fact taken into consideration inrelation to a particular step, it is incumbent on that party to raise that issue withthe judge who deals with that step. In this case, various steps were taken (e.g.
motions, conferences) in relation to which either there was an endorsement thatthere be no order as to costs or the issue of costs was not addressed. In theabsence of a specific order for costs in favour of the Respondent, the trial judgeshould have disallowed costs claimed by the Respondent in relation to such steps.

[27]

It is therefore incumbent on the parties that they deal with costs at each step of the

litigation.

Parties are not permitted to ask the trial Judge for all the costs incurred in the

litigation.
Decision

[28]

In considering who was successful, the Court must review the issues determined, the

parties’ respective positions and offers to settle.

[24]

[29]

I find that the most important issues were the issues of custody and parenting

arrangements. These issues took up most of the Court time at the trialNeither party was able to obtain an order more favourable than their offers to settle which

meet the criteria of Rule 18(14) of the FLRs.

[31]

The mother was not able to obtain an order more favourable than her September 2016

offer, as she wished to reduce the father’s time with the children and obtain sole custody of thechildren.

[32]

As well, the father did not obtain an order more favourable than his September 2016 offer

as he offered equal parenting time with the children.

[33]

However, pursuant to Rule 18(16) of the FLRs the Court can consider other offers to

settle and settlement negotiations.

[34]

It is clear that throughout the litigation, both parties made efforts to resolve this matter.

[35]

In the early stages of the litigation, the parties were prepared to compromise on their

positions.

However, as the litigation continued the parties became more entrenched resulting in

more litigation. In the spring of 2015, the father was anxious to increase his time with his sons.

[36]

He brought two motions to increase time with his son. On the other hand the mother had

to proceed to court to obtain an order for baptism for the children. The order was eventuallyobtained on consent.

[37]

On September 22, 2016, the mother offered in handwriting “what is currently”.

This

does not meet the requirements of Rule 18 offers of the FLRs but the Court is prepared, pursuantto Rule 18(16), to accept handwritten notes if the offer is clear and the terms are comprehensibleto be accepted. Here, the Court finds that the mother’s handwritten notes, purporting to be anoffer, are not capable of being accepted as they are vague and uncertain.

[30]

[38]

The same thing can be said with respect to the mother’s emails which state that she is

prepared to compromise. Those emails do not constitute offers to settle. An offer must be clear

finalize the matter.

[39]

On December 3, 2014, the mother offered joint custody but access as set out in the

separation agreement, asked for the table amount of child support and s. 7 expenses andreimbursement of $1,265 plus $470. She was not successful on the parenting arrangements as thefinal order continued the access as per the interim order of Justice Lacelle of August 2015. Thisincreased father’s access to every second weekend from Thursday after school to Tuesdaymorning.

[40]

In regards to the case conference, the parties have not made any submissions as to the

costs of the case conference, the length of time and why they are entitled to costs. Mr. Lazarovitzhas only submitted his accounts with no bill of costs setting out the time he spent on the caseconference brief, discussions with his client and attendance. The mother is saying that she spentapproximately $10,000 at the case conference but a breakdown of time spent has not beenprovided.

[41]

There is no clear winner of the settlement conference nor a clear articulation of the

parties’ respective positions at the time and whether time and expenses were incurred needlesslyby either party. It would be helpful to a trial Judge who is ultimately deciding costs of a previoushearing if the parties can fix costs for a specific hearing that can be allotted to a party who is theultimate winner of the trial.

[42]

Therefore, each party will bear the costs of the attendances at the case conference and

settlement conference.

[43]

In reviewing the factors set out in Rule 24 (11) of the FLRs:

and concise, and the receiving party must be able to discern exactly what is being offered to

Importance, complexity or difficulty of the issues

[44]

The parenting issue was very important to the parties. The trial was made complex by

The mother insisted on sole custody and a restraining order. The father consented to thebaptism. The father’s request for shared parenting was deferred to a review based on thechildren’s special needs. The mother’s concerns regarding parenting, alcohol problems, lack ofmedical care, neglect of the children and allegations of domestic violence were not accepted bythe Court.
The lawyer’s rates

[45]

Both lawyers’ rates were reasonable.
Time spent and expenses properly paid:

[46]

The mother’s lawyer spent approximately 157.24 hours since June 2016 and does not

include any conferences or motions.

The total spent was over $30,000 plus HST.

seeks partial indemnity of $20,000 inclusive of HST.

The father

Both parties’ disbursements were

reasonable given the length of the trial.

[47]

Therefore, there has been divided success and hence there will be no costs awarded.

Justice A. DoyleDate: 2017/05/29

the testimony of two experts and numerous documents.

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
RE:

Timothy Campbell, ApplicantAND
Isabelle Lapierre, Respondent

BEFORE:

Justice A. Doyle

COUNSEL: Steve Duplain Counsel, for the ApplicantAshish (“ASH”) Duvadie Counsel, forthe RespondentHEARD:

In writing

COSTS ENDORSEMENT

Madame Justice A. Doyle

Released: 2017/05/29

CITATION: Campbell v Lapierre, 2017 ONSC 3017
COURT FILE NO.: FC-12-1470-1
DATE: 2017/05/29

