SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE – ONTARIO
RE:

MICHAEL CANNON / PlaintiffAND
FUNDS FOR CANADA FOUNDATION, MATT GLEESON AND
SARAH STANBRIDGE as trustees for the DONATIONS
CANADA FINANCIAL TRUST, PARKLANE FINANCIAL
GROUP LIMITED, TRAFALGAR ASSOCIATES LIMITED,TRAFALGAR TRADING LIMITED, APPLEBY SERVICES
(BERMUDA) LTD. as trustee for the BERMUDA LONGTAIL
TRUST, EDWIN C. HARRIS Q.C., PATTERSON PALMER alsoknown as PATTERSON PALMER LAW, PATTERSON KITZ
(Halifax), PATTERSON KITZ (Truro), MCINNES COOPER, SAM
ALBANESE, KEN FORD, RIYAD MOHAMMED, DAVID
RABY, GREG WADE, GLEESON MANAGEMENT
ASSOCIATES INC., MARY-LOU GLEESON, MATT GLEESON
and MARTIN P. GLEESON / DefendantsProceeding under the Class Proceedings Act, 1992

BEFORE:

Justice Edward P. Belobaba

COUNSEL: Margaret Waddell and Samuel Marr for the PlaintiffBradley E. Berg and Andrea Laing for Defendant Estera Services BermudaLtd. (formerly Appleby Services) as trustee of the Bermuda Longtail TrustJ.P. Brown for Defendants Parklane Financial Group Limited, TrafalgarAssociates Limited and Trafalgar Trading LimitedMark Walli for Third Party Defendants BDO Dunwoody LLP and RalphNeville

CITATION: Cannon v. Funds for Canada Foundation, 2017 ONSC 2670
COURT FILE NO.: CV-08-362807-CP
DATE: 20170510

- Page 2 -

Remissa Hirji for Third Party Defendants Gacich Financial Enterprises Inc.
and Ted Gacich and othersApril 24, 2017

Class Action Settlement and Related Approvals

[1]
In a short endorsement dated October 18, 2013 I approved the class actionsettlements with the FFCF-Gleeson Defendants and the Lawyer Defendants.1 The amountof the settlement was $28.2 million, with the Lawyer Defendants (their insurers) payingthe bulk. I was satisfied that the settlements were fair and reasonable and in the bestinterests of the class members. I also approved class counsel’s contingency-based legalfees request.2 The class action then continued against the remaining defendants - namely,the ParkLane/Trafalgar Defendants (“ParkLane”) and Appleby Services, known today asEstera Services, as the trustee for the Bermuda Longtail Trust (“Appleby”).

[2]
The action against the ParkLane and Appleby defendants has now settled for $17.5
million plus accrued interest. The plaintiff asks that the settlement, the contingency-basedlegal fees payable to class counsel and the requested honorarium be approved; and furtherthat the claim, counter-claims, cross-claims and third party claims be dismissed withoutcosts.3

[3]
For the reasons set out below, I approve each of these requests. The plaintiff’smotion is granted in its entirety. Order to go as per the draft Order signed on April 28,2017.
Settlement approval

[4]

I agree with class counsel that this settlement is akin to a late stage settlement.

1

Cannon v. Funds for Canada Foundation, 2013 ONSC 7686 at para. 1.

2

Ironworkers Ontario Pension Fund v. Manulife Financial, 2017 ONSC 2669 at para. 4.

3

The costs request of the Gacich third parties is considered at the end of these reasons.

HEARD:

- Page 3 -

[6]
Class counsel’s knowledge level was based in part on information obtained in thesummary judgment motions that were brought by the ParkLane and Law FirmDefendants (and dismissed) at the time of certification. 5 The record on the combinedcertification/summary judgment motions consisted of 38 volumes of evidence andconsumed 16 days of cross-examination. Even more information was obtained from thesettlements with individual defendants, the Appleby jurisdiction motion, the additionaldocuments production that the ParkLane and the Law Firm Defendants were ordered toproduce and the examination of 18 witnesses on the pending motions. Class counsel alsoreceived hundreds of documents from class members including their correspondence withParkLane and its distributors, their contract documents and Gift Program promotionalmaterials in their possession. Class counsel’s knowledge level increased even more afterthe 2013 settlements. Further and extensive documentary productions were obtained fromthe ParkLane defendants and the FFCF-Gleeson and Law Firm Defendants.

[7]
In short, by the time class counsel became involved in settlement discussionswith the ParkLane and Appleby defendants, they had a commanding understanding of therisks and rewards of further litigation.

[8]
Some of these risks included the fact the ParkLane Defendants were most likelyjudgment proof. Appleby (now Estera) and based in Bermuda, remained solvent andcould certainly be pursued but several obstacles materialized: enforcing a class actionjudgment in Bermuda where class actions do not exist would be problematic; further,Appleb insisted that any attempt to enforce a judgment that found Appleby jointly liablewith the ParkLane defendants would be litigated, if need be, to the Privy Council.

[9]
There was also the damages question. Initially, the class members’ global loss inthe charitable Gift Program was in the range of $138.5 million. After the CRA
unexpectedly agreed to settle the objections filed by many class members and recognizethe amount of the class member’s cash donation to the Gift Program as a valid charitablecredit, the global loss was reduced to about $50 million, and then adding CRA interest, to

4

Ironworkers Ontario Pension Fund v. Manulife Financial, 2017 ONSC 2669, at para. 4.

5

Cannon v. Funds for Canada Foundation, 2012 ONSC 399.

[5]
In a late stage settlement, the supervising class action judge will be justified inassuming that class counsel had a complete or almost complete understanding of the risksand rewards of further litigation and the court will be more comfortable relying on classcounsel’s recommendation that the settlement is indeed in the best interests of the class.4

- Page 4 -

[10] Class counsel explained with considerable nuance how they determined that the
$17.5 settlement was more than reasonable. I agree with their analysis but I am alsoprepared to simply accept their recommendation based on their enhanced understandingof the risks and rewards of further litigation. Given the significant risks that confrontedthe plaintiff in his pursuit of Appleby, a settlement of $17.5 million (an amount that ismore than half of the remaining global loss) is, in my view, fair and reasonable and in thebest interests of the class. Not surprisingly, no class member or third party has objected tothe settlement.
Legal fees approval

[11] As I explained in Cannon 7 and again in Middlemiss v. Penn West Petroleum,8 I amprepared to accord presumptive validity to a properly executed contingency feearrangement. It is only through a robust contingency compensation system that classcounsel will be appropriately rewarded for the wins and losses over many files and manyyears of litigation and that the class action will continue to remain viable as a meaningfulvehicle for access to justice.9 In this case, and in any event, the contingency feeagreement was approved by this court at the time of the 2013 settlements. 10

[12] Class counsel is entitled to the 33 per cent contingency as set out in the retaineragreement which amounts to $5,829,427.20 plus HST. The fees request is approved.
Honorarium for Mr. Cannon

6

Of the $28.2 million settlement, the Law Firm Defendants paid $27.25 million and the FFCF-Gleeson Defendantspaid $950,000.
7

Cannon, supra, note 1.

8

Middlemiss v. Penn West Petroleum, 2016 ONSC 3537.

9

Ibid., at para. 19. Also see Ramdath v. George Brown College of Applied Arts and Technology, 2016 ONSC 3536,at note 14: “Over a period of years, plaintiff-side class action firms will win cases and lose cases. The “risk” thatcontingency lawyers face cannot be assessed case-by-case or one-off, but must be measured across a great manyfiles. A “large” contingency recovery in one case will offset the loss or losses in oth er cases. That is why the
“multiplier” approach that purports to assess risk by considering only the case that is currently before the court isfundamentally flawed, indeed unprincipled.”
10

Cannon, supra, note 1, at paras. 12 -13.

just under $60 million. Deduct the $28.2 million recovered from the FFCF-Gleeson andLaw Firm Defendants 6 and the global loss was about $32 million.

- Page 5 -

[14] Out of a class of more than 10,000 individuals, all of whom suffered significantlosses in this charitable tax scheme, Mr. Cannon was the only person willing to take onthe role of representative plaintiff. He spent more than 280 hours working on the case,meeting with and instructing class counsel, swearing affidavits, being cross-examined,producing his private financial documents, participating in the mediation and settlementnegotiations, and suffering the notoriety of being the named plaintiff in a highlypublicized claim involving a charitable tax scheme that the CRA initially disallowed.

[15] Mr. Cannon also put himself at risk financially through his personal interventionin the Appleby (Bermuda Trust) proceedings. Bermuda does not have class proceedings,and the courts may not have recognized Mr. Cannon’s intervention as being in arepresentative capacity. The intervention was not part of the class proceeding and sowould not have been covered by the indemnity from the Class Proceedings Fund. YetMr. Cannon was prepared to take this step because of the importance of preservingAppleby’s undertaking with respect to the Bermuda Longtail Trust funds.

[16] There is another dimension to the request for an honorarium. Mr. Cannon gave upa substantive right – his right to maintain a notice of objection with the CRA – in order tocontinue as the representative plaintiff without the appearance of a conflict of intere st. Heobviously did so for the benefit of the class and to his own personal detriment. Becausehe abandoned his notice of objection and paid the reassessed taxes and interest, Mr.Cannon did not receive the benefit of the CRA offer to settle. As a result of this financialsacrifice, Mr. Cannon is out of pocket some $16,241.

[17] As a result of Mr. Cannon’s efforts, the defendants have now paid over $45.7
million that will be distributed to the class members. I agree with class counsel that Mr.Cannon is entitled to an honorarium that recognizes his remarkable contribution to thesuccess of this class action. An honorarium in the range of $30,000 would not beinappropriate. Add to this the $16,241 out of pocket loss and one can understand why therequested $50,000 makes sense.

[18]

The $50,000 honorarium is approved and shall be paid out of the settlement funds.

Costs request by the Gacich third parties

[19] The distributors of the charitable donation scheme (many of whom also classmembers) were added as third parties to this class proceeding by the ParkLaneDefendants. The Gacich group agrees with the settlement but says it incurred significant

[13] Class counsel also requests that the court approve the payment of an honorariumto the representative plaintiff, Michael Cannon, in the amount of $50,000 to compensatehim for his extraordinary effort in prosecuting this case over the course of eight years.
This is a large honorarium but, in my view, it should be approved.

- Page 6 -

[20] I dealt directly with this very issue in a costs decision that was released on July 18,2014.12 I concluded that deciding who was responsible for which costs relating to theamendment of the common issues would be “an almost impossible task” and that “themost sensible decision was to award costs in the cause.”13 Having now reviewed thecompeting submissions (both sides repeating much of what was said in 2014), I stand bymy earlier decision. I cannot in fairness conclude that Gacich “won” any aspect of themotions in question or that the plaintiff can be blamed in any way for the legal costs thatGacich incurred.

[21]

The re-activated costs request of the Gacich group is dismissed.

Disposition

[22] The $17.5 million settlement (plus accrued interest) is approved as fair andreasonable and in the best interests of the class. Legal fees payable to class counsel in theamount of $5,829,427.20 plus HST and the honorarium payable to the representativeplaintiff in the amount of $50,000 are also approved.

[23]

Order to go as per the draft Order signed on April 28, 2017.

Belobaba J.

11

Cannon v. Funds for Canada Foundation, 2014 ONSC 1056.

12

Cannon v. Funds for Canada Foundation, 2014 ONSC 4334.

13

Ibid., at para. 6.

costs in a 2014 skirmish relating to the amendment of the common issues and the stay ofthe third party proceedings.11 The Gacich group blames the plaintiff for the legal coststhat were incurred and asks for $143,369 on a partial indemnity basis.

- Page 7 -

Date: May 10, 2017

