ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B E T W E E N:
Sharon Mae Carr

- and -

Timothy John Condon

Applicant )
Respondent )

Maria G. Lucarelli and Harold Niman, forthe Applicant

Kirsten Hughes and Michael P. Clarke, forthe Respondent

HEARD: in Welland June 22, 23, 24,October 24, 25, 26 and December 20, 2016

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
P.R. SWEENY J.:
INTRODUCTION

[1]
The Applicant, Sharon Mae Carr, seeks to vary the spousal support payable to her underthe provisions of the Order of MacPherson J. dated November 13, 2012 (“the Order”). TheOrder provides for spousal support fixed in the amount of $12,000 per month based on theincome of the Respondent, Timothy John Condon, of $447,000, plus an additional monthlypayment based on 27 percent of the incentive bonus paid to the Respondent in the prior year. The

CITATION: Carr v. Condon, 2017 ONSC 173
COURT FILE NO.: 11062/09 (Welland)
DATE: 2017-05-29

-2-

[2]
The Respondent resists the motion. He says that there has been no material change thatwould warrant a variation of the order, especially in advance of the review provision in the order.
If there is a material change, according to the Respondent, the Applicant is receiving too muchspousal support and he seeks a variation such that the Applicant would receive only 20 percent ofthe incentive bonus as opposed to 27 percent. In addition, the Respondent denies that thepayments made by his employer are incentive employment income as defined by the Order.
GENERAL BACKGROUND FACTS

[3]
Many of the facts are not at issue in this proceeding. The parties prepared a Statement ofAgreed Facts.

[4]
The Applicant was born on July 5, 1965. The Respondent was born on September 27,1962. The parties were married on August 29, 1987. The parties separated on March 21, 2008.
There are two children of the marriage, Kate Emily Condon, born August 5, 1989, and KimberlyAnne Condon, born November 9, 1991.

[5]
The Applicant commenced litigation following the separation. In 2012, the partiesattended mediation with Mr. Alfred Mamo. As a result of the mediation, the parties entered intoMinutes of Settlement, which were incorporated into the Order. The Order provided that theRespondent pay the Applicant spousal support in the amount of $12,000 per month based on theRespondent’s annual salary of $447,000 and the Applicant’s imputed income of $30,000. Inaddition, the Respondent was ordered to pay to the Applicant periodic spousal support equivalentto 27 percent of his incentive employment income above base salary, calculated on a 12-monthcalendar-year basis. The Respondent’s annual incentive employment income above his basesalary was ordered to include gross bonus or cash received for any options, shares or other formsof compensation, which is referred to as the “annual incentive compensation above base salary.”
The Order provides for the terms to be reviewed and/or varied upon either party establishing amaterial change from the circumstances existing at the time of the execution of the Minutes ofSettlement, dated October 2, 2012. Such a material change of circumstances includes, but is notlimited to, a change in the financial circumstances of either party.

[6]
The Order provided that a review of spousal support would take place on September 1,2017. On the review, there are a number of factors that will be taken into consideration indetermining the appropriate amount of spousal support. These include the financialcircumstances of the parties at that time, the period of time which has elapsed since the date ofseparation, the Applicant’s obligation to take reasonable steps to maximize her efforts tocontribute towards her own support including pursuing education or training, and the obligationof both parties to save and invest prudently for future financial security. The Order also includedan acknowledgment that if the Applicant had not maximized her efforts, an amount of income

Applicant says that there has been a material change in that the Respondent’s income, both salaryand bonuses, have increased substantially. She seeks spousal support fixed in the amount of
$84,951 per month, retroactive adjustment of support to the date of the application, and a findingthat a number of payments received by the Respondent from his employer should be subject tothe 27 percent additional monthly payment.

-3-

[7]
At the time of the Order, the parties had equalized their net family property. Thecombined net family property was approximately $3.8 million. Both the Applicant and theRespondent had a net worth of approximately $1.9 million as a result of the equalization.

[8]
At the time of separation, the Respondent was a senior executive with Canadian TireCorporation for which he had worked for 18 years. He was working in Welland and Toronto.
The Respondent’s income for the years is as follows: 2006 - $706,013; 2007 - $812,861; 2008 $1,003,237. (In 2005, the Respondent made in excess of $2.5 million. This was an anomaly.)

[9]
On January 9, 2009, the Respondent’s employment was terminated by Canadian Tire andhe received a severance package. On December 14, 2009, the Respondent commencedemployment with British Columbia Automobile Association as President and Chief ExecutiveOfficer. His base salary was $400,000 per annum plus the use of a fleet vehicle, an annualincentive bonus and long-term incentive bonus, benefits, and a pension. In subsequent years, hisincome was as follows: 2010 - $480,378; 2011 - $502,423; 2012 - $746,555; 2013 - $826,061.

[10]
On March 10, 2014, the Respondent began employment with AAA Northern California,Nevada & Utah as President and Chief Executive Officer. His base salary was $550,000 USD,plus a car allowance of $14,400 USD, benefits, and incentive income. In 2015, the incentivebonuses paid to the Applicant totaled $1,441,899 USD. The Respondent’s income for 2016
exceeds his total income for 2015 and it is anticipated to continue to increase.
ISSUES

[11]

The issues on this motion are as follows:
(1) Is there a material change in circumstances such that the spousal supportprovisions in the Order may be varied?
(2) If there is a material change, should the spousal support provisions in the Orderbe changed and, if so, how?
(3) Is the Applicant entitled to 27 percent of the disputed payments received by theRespondent?

MATERIAL CHANGE

[12]
The order itself specifically provides that the terms shall be reviewed and/or varied uponeither party establishing a material change.
This would include a change to the financialcircumstances of either party. In addition, the Divorce Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp.), s.
17(4.1) refers to a change in the condition, means, needs or other circumstances of either formerspouse since the making of the order.

would be imputed to the Applicant in excess of the $30,000 per year that was imputed to her atthe time the Order was entered into.

[13]
The Applicant says the significant increase in the Respondent’s income is a materialchange. The Respondent, in his response to the motion to change, asked for a change in spousalsupport on the basis of a change in circumstances. One of those changes was that he was paid inUS dollars and the Applicant thus receives a significant increase in support. In addition, anincrease in salary of this magnitude was not anticipated in the Order. At the commencement ofthis trial, the Respondent asserted, as his first position, that there was no material change, and,secondly, if there was, there should actually be a decrease in the spousal support paid. TheRespondent’s position is really that no motion to change should have been brought and,accordingly, it should be dismissed. However, given that the motion was brought, he seeks toreduce the spousal support payable.

[14]
It is clear to me that there has been a material change in circumstances within themeaning of the order itself and s. 17(4.1) of the Divorce Act. The significant increase in theApplicant’s income was not contemplated by the parties when the order was made. At the timethe order was entered into, the Respondent’s income for the purposes of determining spousalsupport was significantly less than his historical income. The average of his annual incomes in2006, 2007, and 2008 is $840,000. This is in contrast to the 2010 income of $480,378 and 2011
income of $502,423. This was a fact which must have been considered in the determination ofthe spousal support provision of the Order.
THE APPROPRIATE VARIATION ORDER

[15]
As noted by Chappel J. in Menegaldo v. Menegaldo, 2012 ONSC 2915, [2012] W.D.F.L.
5086, at para. 49:
Once the court is satisfied that there has been a material change since the existingorder was made, it must determine the appropriate variation, if any, that should bemade to the existing order. Even if the threshold test of a change in circumstancesis met, it does not necessarily follow that a change to the existing order must bemade.

[16]
The Applicant seeks an order that spousal support be fixed in the amount of $84,951 permonth based on imputed income to her of $72,000. She says the Spousal Support AdvisoryGuidelines (SSAGs) should be used. She asserts that she is entitled to share in the Respondent’ssignificant increase in income following separation.
The amount should be fixed so theApplicant does not have to have regular annual contact with the Respondent.

[17]
The Respondent says that if there should be any change in the spousal support, thechange should be that the Applicant receive only 20 percent of the incentive bonus and not the27 percent as mandated by the Order. The formula should continue. The Respondent resists theApplicant’s entitlement to a share of the post-separation increases in income.

[18]
Both parties agree that the review as set out in the Order should be postponed toSeptember 1, 2020.

-4-

-5-

(a) recognize any economic advantages or disadvantages to the formerspouses arising from the marriage or its breakdown;
(b) apportion between the former spouses any financial consequences arisingfrom the care of any child of the marriage over and above the obligation forthe support of any child of the marriage;
(c) relieve any economic hardship of the former spouses arising from thebreakdown of the marriage; and
(d) in so far as practicable, promote the economic self-sufficiency of eachformer spouse within a reasonable period of time.

[20]
All of the factors must be considered, and no one factor has greater importance than anyother factor.

[21]
The SSAGs are relevant on an application for variation. The SSAGs specifically providea ceiling of gross annual payor income of $350,000. Above that ceiling, the formula should nolonger be automatically applied. However, the $350,000 is not a cap (see discussion in SpousalSupport Advisory Guidelines: The Revised User’s Guide, April 2016, Professors Carol Rogersonand Rollie Thompson, ch. 11 [“User’s Guide”]).

[22]
Given that the Order contemplates a review and the parties have agreed that the reviewshould take place in 2020, I view my task as a more limited variation application, not a de novoassessment more akin to an initial application.
However, the significant income of theRespondent over the $350,000 ceiling in the SSAGs and the significant increase in income of theRespondent post-separation requires an analysis of the basis for entitlement to spousal support.

[23]
In examining the spousal support in the context of post-separation increases in payorincome, at page 83, the authors of the User’s Guide write:
The basis of entitlement has a significant impact upon the degree of sharing ofincreases, with compensatory claims more likely to result in sharing than noncompensatory claims, but not exclusively so. There can be a sharing – partial, oreven full – in non-compensatory cases too, especially after long marriages.

[24]
This is a high-income situation. These cases “raise fundamental theoretical questionsabout the rationale and purpose of spousal support” (User’s Guide, page 58). With thesecomments in mind, I will examine the basis of spousal support.

[19]
In deciding whether the order should be varied, the court must take into consideration allthe factors set out in s. 17(7) of the Act, which reads that an order varying spousal supportshould:

-6-

COMPENSATORY SUPPORT

[26]i.
Non-specific compensatory support (where a spouse’s ability to achieve selfsufficiency was comprised by career/job dislocation for the family);ii.

Specific calculable disadvantage (where a spouse can point to a specificcalculable overriding loss resulting from the marriage or the roles adopted inmarriage); and

iii.

Specific calculable and advantage conferred (where a spouse conferred asubstantial career enhancement opportunity on the other spouse).

In this case, it is my understanding that the Applicant does not assert she is entitled tocompensatory support on the basis that she gave up a career in order to stay home and care forthe children. The Applicant acknowledges that any career she could have had would not havegenerated anywhere near the income which the Respondent’s has generated and generates. Herclaim for compensatory support is based on the fact that she took on increased domesticresponsibilities to enable the Respondent to pursue his career. The statutory basis forcompensatory support is found in ss. 15.2(6)(a) and (b), and ss. 17(7)(a) and (b) of the DivorceAct.

[27]
The main issue from the Applicant’s perspective is her entitlement to share in theincreased income of the Respondent. On a compensatory basis to entitlement, there need not bea direct causal connection between the post-separation income increase and the contributionsduring the marriage by the recipient spouse; however, there must be some link or connection. Inthis case, the Respondent had completed his business course at the Ivey School of Business priorto marriage. He had an executive position with PepsiCo before the marriage. Over the course ofthe marriage, he continued to work in executive positions. The Applicant spoke of attendingcertain corporate events.
The parties agree that there were moves for the Respondent’s work.
These moves might be relevant to a claim that the Applicant could not advance in her career andsuffered her own personal career setbacks as a result of them. However, in my view, thesemoves alone do not establish entitlement to compensatory support.

[28]
As L’Heureux-Dubé J. noted in Moge v. Moge, [1992] 3 SCR 813, 99 D.L.R. (4th) 456,at para. 84:
A spouse may contribute to the operation of a business, typically through theprovision of secretarial, entertainment or bookkeeping services, or may take onincreased domestic and financial responsibilities to enable the other topursue licenses, degrees or other training and education. To the extent that these

[25]
There are three conceptual models upon which entitlement to spousal support may arise:
(1) compensatory support; (2) non-compensatory support; and (3) contractual support: Bracklowv. Bracklow, [1999] 1 S.C.R. 420, 169 D.L.R. (4th) 577. The issue of contractual support doesnot arise in this case.

-7-

[29]
In this case, the economic benefit of the relationship has been shared by the division offamily assets. The economic benefits to the Applicant were significant. The Applicant’scontributions toward child care and maintaining the home during the course of the marriage havebeen compensated to some extent by the division of family assets. The significant net familyproperty was generated as a result of the parties’ economic union and lifestyle.

[30]
The contributions referred to in Moge are not present in this case. There was noassistance in the operation of a business or the establishment of a business. There was nosignificant education undertaken by the Respondent at the expense of the Applicant. He tooksome short courses, but that is not sufficient to establish this basis for compensatory support.

[31]
This was a traditional marriage, where the Applicant did not work outside the home. Sheprovided care for the children when they were younger and continued to provide assistance to thechildren while they attended their private schools. This provided time for the Respondent tocontinue to pursue his career. However, there was no substantial career enhancement conferredby the Applicant on the Respondent.

[32]
The Respondent was fired from his employer of 18 years. He found a new job byanswering an advertisement. He relocated across Canada to secure employment. This was adifferent field, the not-for-profit industry as opposed to the for-profit industry. His presentposition in the United States was gained as a result of his exposure in this new field. The natureof the Respondent’s employment has changed. He has relocated to the United States. This newposition in a new country occurs six years after separation. I find the Applicant is not entitled toshare significantly in the Respondent’s increase in income.

[33]
The significant income that the Respondent earned and now earns is a factor which I
consider in exercising my discretion. The Respondent’s income had dropped significantly fromhistorical levels prior to the mediation and the Order. To the extent that post-separationincreases rise to the historical average income prior to separation, I consider these increases indetermining appropriate spousal support.
NON-COMPENSATORY SUPPORT

[34]
An entitlement to non-compensatory support is predicated on need. It finds its basis inss. 15.2(6)(a) and (b), and ss. 17(7)(c) and (d) of the Divorce Act. In the majority of cases, theissue to be addressed is a significant discrepancy in the standards of living which is experiencedby spouses post-separation. In the normal course, the lower-income spouse experiences asignificant drop in standard of living after the marriage breakdown.

[35]
The parties’ standard of living is relevant to support entitlements (see Moge, at para. 85).
The parties’ lifestyle during the marriage was comfortable and active but not extravagant. TheApplicant testified as to the frugal nature of the Respondent. The parties each drove nice cars:
the Applicant drove a Honda Pilot, and the Respondent, a Lexus ES300. These are not lavish

activities have not already been compensated for pursuant to the division ofassets, they are factors that should be considered in granting spousal support.

-8-

[36]
Insight into the standard of living the parties experienced during the course of themarriage is gained by a review of the financial statements prepared by the parties in the contextof the initial application. The Applicant’s financial statement, sworn May 4, 2009, shows actualexpenses in the range of $15,000 per month (exclusive of child-related expenses including tuitionand income tax deductions). This would amount to approximately $26,000 before tax. At thattime, the Applicant claimed $4,000 per month for vacations, which was very high given theparties’ history of vacations during the marriage. The Respondent claimed monthly expenses ofapproximately $12,000 (exclusive of child and spousal support payments and income taxdeductions).

[37]
In this motion to change, the Applicant initially sought support in the amount of $50,000
per month. This was increased to $100,000 per month on a motion at the outset of the hearing.
On the initial financial statement in support of this application, the Applicant showed expenses inthe range of $25,500 net of income tax, CPP and EI contributions. The Applicant seeks spousalsupport in the amount of $84,951 per month.

[38]
The Applicant’s proposed budget greatly exceeds any amounts expended by the partiesduring the marriage. The Applicant’s evidence, repeated on several occasions, with respect tothe proposed expenditures was “If we were still married, that’s what we would have done.” Thisstatement is of no assistance in determining the issues before me. When the parties weremarried, their spending was not extravagant, even when the Respondent earned significantamounts of money. I also note that the Applicant’s evidence was that the Respondent was verycontrolling and questioned her spending. Therefore, it seems very unlikely that extravagantexpenses would have been incurred if the parties were still married. In this case, the Applicantseeks a level of spousal support which would provide a much higher standard of living than theparties experienced during the marriage.

[39]
Once the amount of support is determined, the recipient has the right to spend thesupport payments as he or she deems appropriate. However, to the extent that an order forsupport takes into consideration the needs and lifestyle of the parties during the marriage, theproposed budget and historical expenses are relevant factors for the court to consider:
Marinangeli v. Marinangeli (2003), 66 O.R. (3d) 40, 228 D.L.R. (4th) 376 (C.A.). TheApplicant’s proposed budget is not consistent with the historical spending of the parties.

[40]
If this were an initial application or a review, the appropriate analysis would include anexamination of the standard of living of the couple at the date of separation. The economicbenefits of the partnership would be taken into consideration in the equalization of net familyproperty. In this case, the parties accumulated approximately $3.8 million over the almost 21
years of their cohabitation.

vehicles. The parties financially assisted both sets of parents. However, that assistance was notparticularly substantial. The family went on vacations but not extravagant ones; for example, atrip to Florida was an annual occurrence. The parties lived in a nice home in Fonthill which hada value of approximately $450,000 on the date of separation.

[41]
The basis of support, as compensatory or needs-based or both, would then be examined.
The Respondent’s significant income is a factor to be taken into consideration. The entitlementto support in this case is primarily needs-based. These needs arise as a result of the lifestyle ofthe family during the marriage. After this 21-year traditional marriage, it would not beappropriate that the Applicant’s lifestyle be significantly reduced from the lifestyle she enjoyedduring the marriage, as a result of the breakdown of the marriage.

[42]
In determining the appropriate level of spousal support, consideration of the income thatcould be earned by the Applicant would also be a factor. For expenses of approximately
$180,000 per year, a significant income stream would be required. The Applicant, given hertraining and education, is unlikely to earn anywhere near the amount necessary to maintain thatlifestyle. The Applicant has acknowledged that it is appropriate to impute income to her. TheApplicant has proposed an imputed income of $72,000. This is based on $40,000 employmentincome and $32,000 interest and other investment income.

[43]
As I have indicated, the Applicant’s monthly expenses were in the range of $15,000 atthe date of the initial application in 2009. This includes an extraordinary amount of $4,000 forvacations. In the circumstances, the expenses to live in accordance with the lifestyle experiencedduring the marriage are likely in the range of $12,000 to $13,000 per month. In my view, anaward of spousal support in the range of $84,000 per month requested by the Applicant wouldnot be appropriate.

[44]
This is a motion to change. Therefore, I must consider the Order which contemplated aset amount for spousal support of $12,000 per month. It was based on income over the $350,000
ceiling referred to in the SSAGs. There is also a provision to allow for the sharing of theRespondent’s incentive income. The parties specifically included a five-year review as a part ofthe order and directed that review to consider, inter alia, the prudent investment of incomereceived. I should only order a variation that is justified by the material change.

[45]
The Applicant wishes to fix spousal support because she does not wish to have anyinteractions with the Respondent. She says the Respondent’s communications have beenintimidating. I agree that the Respondent’s communications to the Applicant could reasonablybe perceived as aggressive and intimidating.
The Respondent’s letter was addressed to
“Applicant.” However, the Respondent did provide the information necessary for the Applicantto calculate the bonus payable. The difficulty in communication is not a material change tojustify a variation to a fixed monthly amount for spousal support.

[46]
The Applicant asserts that the Respondent was deceptive in dealing with her by failing torefer, in his letter of December 2013, to a payment of bonus money to the Respondent made inJanuary 2013. The information about the earlier payment was disclosed in correspondence toMs. Carr’s counsel in January 2013 and the Applicant was aware of the payment as it wasincluded in the bonus agreement she drafted dated December 18, 2013. I find there was nointended deception on the part of the Respondent.

[47]
The historical average income of the Respondent in the three years prior to thetermination of his employment was $840,000. The SSAGs applied to that payor income and

-9-

- 10 -

[48]
If I were to order support at the high end in the amount of $26,880 per month retroactiveto May 2014, the Applicant would have to repay the Respondent because she has received morein support as a result of the formula contained in the Order.

[49]
The Respondent’s request to reduce the incentive amount to 20 percent from 27 percentwould not, in my view, respect the agreement reached by the parties and incorporated into theOrder. As I understand the Respondent’s position, he is prepared to live by the agreement withthe understanding that a review will take place in 2020.

[50]
The parties, in entering into the Order, determined a formula to provide support to theApplicant on a fixed basis, with an additional amount based on bonuses received by theRespondent. Notwithstanding the increase in the Respondent’s income, the parties’ efforts toquantify and articulate an amount of support ought to be respected. Although there was asignificant increase in the Respondent’s income, I have determined it is not appropriate to makeany variation of the Order with respect to spousal support. Accordingly, the motion to changewith respect to the provision of spousal support is dismissed.
INCENTIVE EMPLOYMENT INCOME

[51]

Paragraph 2 of the Order reads as follows:
In addition to the spousal support set out in paragraph one (1) above, theRespondent shall pay to the Applicant periodic spousal support that isequivalent to 27% of his incentive employment income above base salarycalculated on a 12 month calendar year basis. The Respondent’s annualincentive employment income above base salary shall include: gross bonus orcash received for any options, shares or other forms of compensation (hereinafter referred to as “annual incentive compensation above base salary”).

[52]
There is a dispute as to certain amounts received by the Respondent. Are they incentiveemployment income? These are identified as follows:
(1) 2013 BCAA Golf Membership

$73,500.00

(2) 2013 BCAA Incent “N”

$972.50

(3) 2014 AAA Relocation Expenses

$147,119.00 (housing $55,720.00)

(4) 2015 AAA Paid time off (PTO)

$14,808.08

(5) 2014 AAA 401K

$133,298.50

(6) 2015 AAA 401K

$17,212.99

imputing $72,000 income to the Respondent gives a range of money spousal support of $20,160
to $26,880. I note this quantum of support is also consistent with the apparent historicalspending of the parties as expressed in the financial statements sworn in the initial application.
This is a significant and substantial income.

TOTAL

$386,911.07

(27% SHARE)

$104,465.99

[53]
In deciding the issue, I must examine the order and its terms. The word “incentive” isused in the Order. “Incentive” is defined in the Concise Oxford English Dictionary, 12 ed.
(Oxford U.P.: Oxford, 2011) as “A thing that motivates or encourages someone to do something;A payment or concession to stimulate greater output or investment.” The parties did not use theterms “benefits” or “perquisites” in referring to this 27 percent calculation. This omissionsuggests that it is not just the value of a benefit paid by the employer that is to be captured but abenefit with an incentive component.
There must be an incentive component. Given thatdefinition, I shall address the items disputed.

[54]
The determination of whether the payments made are incentive employment income inaccordance with the Order is not a determination as to whether these payments might be includedas income for the purposes of determining spousal or child support. The experts were retained bythe parties to calculate income for the purposes of spousal support. The experts were notconcerned with determining whether or not these payments were incentive employment incomeas referred to in the Order. I must determine whether the parties intended these payments to beconsidered incentive employment income such that the Applicant would be entitled to 27 percentthereof.
(1) BCAA Golf Membership – This was provided to the Respondent by his employer atno charge to him. There was no target he had to meet to receive that benefit. It was in thenature of a gift. He did not receive any cash value. It was not transferable. I find it is notincentive employment income as the term is used in the Order.
(2) BCAA Incent “N” – It appears this is some incentive income that was paid by itsname alone. Accordingly, it will be included as income and the Applicant is entitled to a27 percent share of it.
(3) AAA Relocation Expenses – These expenses were paid by the employer on behalf ofthe Respondent.
This was done to facilitate his commencing his employmentimmediately. There were two elements: (1) reimbursement of relocation expenses, and
(2) payment of living expenses. The relocation expenses were expenses incurred torelocate. They were not incentives or bonus income. The reimbursement of expenseswas a perk paid to the Respondent. I find it is not incentive employment income suchthat the Applicant is entitled to receive 27 percent thereof.
(4) AAA Paid Time Off (PTO) – I am satisfied that, based on the evidence, the paid timeoff is equivalent to vacation pay. The entries on the Respondent’s pay slips show thepayments being made as an accounting exercise. The Respondent did not receiveadditional income. It is not incentive employment income.
(5) AAA 401K Income – These payments are akin to RRSP contributions. They aremade by the employer. There are annual contributions made based on the company’s

- 11 -

- 12 -

CONCLUSION

[55]
For the foregoing reasons, the motion to change with respect to spousal support isdismissed. The Applicant is entitled to 27 percent of the $972.50 BCAA Incent “N” for 2013.

[56]
If the parties are unable to agree upon costs, I will accept written submissions limited to10 pages plus bills of costs and any offers to settle addressed to me at my chambers in Hamilton.
The Respondent shall have 14 days from release of this decision to provide his submissions. TheApplicant shall have a further 14 days to provide her submissions. Any request for an extensionof time may be made in writing to me with a copy to counsel.
___________________________
Sweeny J.
Released:

May 29, 2017

performance. They are not tied to any action on the part of the Respondent. On theRespondent’s evidence, they are not taxable until they are received by the employee.
They cannot be accessed until the employee leaves the company or experiences extremehardship.
In my view, these are not payments which would qualify as incentiveemployment income.

CITATION: Carr v. Condon, 2017 ONSC 173
COURT FILE NO.: 11062/09 (Welland)
DATE: 2017-05-29

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B E T W E E N:
Sharon Mae CarrApplicant
- and -

Timothy John CondonRespondent

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

PRS:co/js

Released:

May 29, 2017

ONTARIO

