ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

Children and Family Services of York
Region
Applicant )
– and –
G. H.
Respondent )
– and –
R. H.
Respondent )

Nancy Guatto, Counsel for the Applicant

Lance Talbot, Counsel for theRespondents

HEARD: In writing

RULING ON COSTS
WARNING
This is a case under Part Ill- Child Protection, of the Child and Family Services Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.
C-11 and is subject to subsections 45(8) and 76(11) of the Act. These subsections and subsecti on85(3) of the Child and Family Services Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C-11, which deals with the consequenc esof failure to comply with subsections 45(8) and 76(11), read as follows:
45(8)

PROHIBITION: IDENTIFYING CHILDREN- No person shall publish or make publicinformation that has the effect of identifying a child who is a witness at or aparticipant in a hearing or the subject of a proceeding, or the child's parent or foster

CITATION: CFSYR v. G.H. and R.H., 2017 ONSC 3098
NEWMARKET COURT FILE NO.: FC-15-48047-00
DATE: 20170525

2

76(11)

PUBLICATION- No person shall publish or make public information that has theeffect of identifying a witness or a participant in a hearing, or a party to a hearingother than a society.

85(3)

OFFENCES- A person who contravenes subsection 45(8) or 76(11) (publication ofidentifying information) or an order prohibiting publication made under clause45(7)(c) or subsection 45(9), and a director, officer or employee of a corporationwho authorizes, permits or concurs in such a contravention by the corporation, isguilty of an offence and on conviction is liable toa fine of not more than $10,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than threeyears, orto both.

JARVIS J.:

[1]

This Ruling deals with costs arising from protection proceedings.

[2]

On February 7, 2017 an Order was made, as requested by the Society, to withdraw aProtection Application involving two children.
The parents seek costs against theSociety. They claim that the Society failed to properly discharge its statutory obligations;in particular, failing to adequately investigate the protection concerns, failing to re-assessits position as more information became available and failing to act in a fair andreasonable manner throughout the process.
The Society maintains that it actedappropriately in carrying out its mandate.

[3]

The parents seek all-inclusive costs of $47,864.27 on a full recovery basis or,alternatively, partial recovery costs of $35,898.17.

[4]

The parents and Society delivered Affidavits, supplemented by written submissions, andauthorities upon which they relied. The parents made an Offer to Settle dated August 30,2016 proposing that the Protection Application be withdrawn by October 1, 2016 withoutcosts.

Background

[5]

The Protection Application was started on May 27, 2015. The children involved werethen five and three years old. The Society claimed that the children were in need ofprotection because they had suffered harm (sections 37 (2)(a)(i) and 37 (2)(a)(ii) of theChild and Family Services Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C. 11 (“CFSA”)), are likely to sufferharm (sections 37 (2)(b)(i) and 37 (2)(b)(ii) of the CFSA) and that there was a risk ofsexual molestation or exploitation (section 37 (2)(d) of the CFSA).

[6]

The genesis of the Application is particularly relevant, and may be summarized asfollows:

parent or a member of the child's family.

3
the children are the biological children of the father.
mother shortly after birth;

They were adopted by the

(b)

the biological mother of the children was a surrogate. She was an immigrant fromSt. Vincent and a friend of the father and mother (sometimes referred to as “theparents” or severally as “the father” or “the mother” as the context warrants). Sheresided with the parents for about a year between June 2008 to July 2009;

(c)

the surrogate had four children of her own, all of whom lived in St. Vincent. Thesurrogate asked, and the parents agreed, that they would apply for guardianship ofthe three oldest children who, subsequently, became permanent residents ofCanada and lived with the parents until September/October 2013 after which theybegan to live with their mother in Toronto;

(d)

on or about March 2, 2015 the parents were notified by Canada Immigration thatthey were ineligible to apply for Canadian citizenship for the children becausethey were not the children's adoptive or biological parents. They, in turn, relayedthis news to the surrogate;

(e)

while the evidence is disputed, it is a not unreasonable inference that therelationship between the parents and the surrogate deteriorated after the CanadaImmigration letter. That is what the parent’s allege;

(f)

on or about May 3, 2015 the parents became aware that the surrogate had madeallegations about them of physical and mental abuse of her children and sexualabuse of one of the surrogate’s daughters by the father, which the recipient ofthose allegations was obliged to report to the authorities;

(g)

the Children's Aid Society of Toronto (“CAST”) reported the allegations to theSociety;

(h)

the children were interviewed by a Society worker on May 12, 2015. No actionwas taken;

(i)

around this time the father was charged with sexual assault of one of thesurrogate’s children. Both parents were charged with assault involving one ormore of the surrogate’s children. The mother was also charged with assaultinvolving one of her children;

(j)

the parent’s oldest child was interviewed again on May 22, 2015 by a differentSociety worker and a York Region police detective;

(k)

a decision was made by the Society to apprehend the children, which was done onMay 22, 2015;

(l)

the Protection Application was started on May 27, 2015;

(a)

(m)

the children were placed with the paternal aunt and uncle subject to conditionswhich involved continued parental contact;

(n)

judicial conferences in the protection proceedings were held afterwards. A reviewof the Endorsement Record discloses that adjournments of the ProtectionApplication were agreed because, in particular, the mother's criminal trial wasexpected to commence in January 2016 (December 15, 2015 Endorsement), laterrescheduled to July, 2016 (February 4, 2016 Endorsement). This laterEndorsement also referred to the father's preliminary hearing on the sex assaultcharge, which was scheduled for June 2016. An April 4, 2016 Endorsement notedthat the parents were seeking the adjournment until after the conclusion of themother's criminal trial;

(o)

the father's preliminary hearing was held on June 16, 2016;

(p)

the criminal charge against the mother involving one of the children waswithdrawn by the Crown on July 13, 2016. The other charge against the motherinvolving one of the surrogate’s children was withdrawn on August 18, 2016;

(q)

the children were returned to their mother’s care but the father was not permittedby the Society to return to the family home;

(r)

the parents made their Offer to Settle on August 30, 2016;

(s)

all criminal charges against the father were withdrawn by the Crown onSeptember 30, 2016; and,

(t)

the Protection Application was withdrawn on February 7, 2017.

Position of the Parents

[7]

Under the all-encompassing umbrella that the Society did not to act in a fair or reasonablemanner, the parent's position is that the Society failed to discharge its duties in threerespects, each of which will be considered.

(a) Excessive Disclosure Delay

[8]

On May 27, 2015, five days after the children's apprehension, Kaufman J. noted that theparents had just been provided with the Society's material and that disclosure to theparent’s counsel was to be made by June 10, 2015. That was not done.

[9]

On June 11, 2015, the parent’s counsel wrote to the Society's counsel for its disclosure.
No disclosure was apparently provided.

4

[10]

A further written request for disclosure was made by the parents on August 21, 2015. Itdoes not appear that disclosure was provided.

[11]

On August 25, 2015 Kaufman J. ordered that Society disclosure was to be provided bySeptember 30, 2015. That was not done.

[12]

Disclosure was provided to the parents on or about October 28, 2015. None of thedisclosure included any disclosure from CAST, which the parents allege was thefoundation for the Protection Application.

[13]

After the father's criminal charges were withdrawn on September 30, 2016 it appears thatthe parents requested that the Protection Application be withdrawn or dismissed. In aletter to the father's counsel dated October 7, 2016, the Society's counsel (Ms. Guatto)
wrote:
With respect to this withdrawal [of the criminal charges], while I
appreciate [R.H.] is anxious, under the circumstances, to bereunited with his family as soon as possible…the outcome of thecriminal proceedings do not dictate what happens in the childprotection matter. There is a different burden of proof in ourproceedings which is not as onerous as that of a criminal matter.
That being said, however, the fact that the charges were withdrawnis definitely an important new development on this file that theSociety will carefully consider.
In order for the Society to make a fully informed decision on yourclient’s request, now more than ever we require the CAST file onthe matter, and in particular the notes pertaining to the interviewsof the [surrogate’s] children insofar as they relate to the allegationsagainst [R.H.]. This documentation has been requested by theSociety on a number of occasions, including on June 24, 2016 andagain on September 27, 2016, which was followed up with awritten request. I was also advised yesterday, by Family ServicesSupervisor Deborah Slater that she was discussing this requestwith the CAST Supervisor who has now indicated that in order forthe Society to obtain this information we will require consentsfrom [the surrogate] and her children, failing which we will need tobring a third party records application.
…As soon as we have all relevant information with respect to theinterviews and the reasons for the withdrawal of the charges wewill be in a position to make an informed decision about [R.H.]’sability to return to the family home.

[14]

Key to the parents’ concern was the fact that the Society did not have the CAST records.
This was also addressed in Ms. Guatto’s letter,

5

It is my understanding, from speaking with Ms. Slater and NicolaGraham, that during the transfer meeting with parents that tookplace in August, Ms. Graham asked [R.H.] if he had ever receiveda copy of this disclosure as part of his criminal proceeding, and ifso, if the Society was experiencing difficulty obtaining thisinformation could he provide it to us. [R.H.] indicated that he didhave this material and that he could provide it to us. While I
appreciate that he may not have fully understood what was beingasked of him, if he is able to get this information to us, that wouldobviously expedite this process given the position now being takenby CAST regarding their documentation.
In addition, in terms of making a decision regarding [R.H.]’srequest, the Society will need to obtain information regarding thereason(s) for the withdrawal of the charges. In this regard, anyinformation you are able to share, including information from
[R.H.]’s criminal counsel would be greatly appreciated.

[15]

No information why the charges against the father were withdrawn was provided to theSociety by either him or his criminal counsel. The father maintained that it was theSociety’s duty to provide to him all of the records upon which it was relying.

[16]

A further request was made by the Society to the father on or about November 22, 2016
but when there was apparently no response to that request, the Society wrote to theCrown on November 29, 2016 for an explanation. There is no evidence that the Societyinitiated any such inquiry from the Crown after September 30, 2016 until then. OnDecember 7, 2016 the Society contacted the Crown to follow up its request. In anEndorsement made by Kaufman J. on December 22, 2016 involving a Motion by theparents to, among other relief requested, permit the father to return to the family home,the court made an Order suo motu that, “in the event that the Newmarket CrownAttorney’s office does not provide the Society with information concerning the decisionto withdraw the charges against [the father] by January 23, 2017 then [the Crownattorney] or his designate shall attend court on January 24, 2017 [this being the datescheduled for a Trial Management Conference] with the requested information or anexplanation as to why it has not been provided”.

[17]

On January 17, 2017 the Society advised that its file, which included the CAST records,was available. Three days later the Crown advised the Society that the decision towithdraw the criminal charges against the father was made after a review of thepreliminary hearing transcripts and material provided by the father’s criminal defensecounsel. Based on that review and the reliability and credibility of the witnesses therewas no reasonable prospect of conviction. The Society advised the parents later that dayin a letter to their counsel that it proposed to withdraw the Protection Application, whichwas done on February 7, 2017.

6

[18]

The Society acknowledges that there was significant delay in providing disclosure butmaintains that no prejudice was caused to the parents. The May 27, 2015 affidavit of theworker given to the parents at court that day contained what the Society contends wasdetailed information about the statements made by the surrogate’s children to CAST andby the parent’s children and, in any event, the Society speculates that it was likely that theparents would have been aware of what was being said through the Crown disclosureprocess in the criminal proceedings.

(b) Failure to Adequately Investigate

[19]

The parents claim that the Society undertook no independent investigation of its ownbefore starting the Protection Application. According to them, the Society should haveinterviewed the surrogate’s children and made an effort to reconcile conflictingstatements of harm made by one of their own children. Had the Society undertaken suchan investigation it would have also discovered that the CAST intake disclosed that it wasthe mother, not the father, who was the subject of the investigation. The verificationdecision was not done for any concerns about the father. However, a June 24, 2016
Society file note made during a meeting between the parents and a Society supervisornoted in several areas that the protection concerns had been verified. In relation to thefather, this was untrue.

[20]

The Society acknowledged that CAST failed to verify the allegations made against thefather. It assumed that verification had been made. However, the Society maintains thatthe decision to start the Protection Application was appropriate because there wassufficient information based on the Society's interviews of the children, the records of theinterviews with the surrogate’s children and the criminal charges against the parents. Inother words, CAST’s failure to verify the allegations was a procedural irregularity whichwould not have affected the Society's decision to apprehend.

[21]

According to the parents, the Society should have interviewed friends, communitymembers, a stepdaughter and, specifically, the surrogate’s children to flush outinconsistencies in their allegations.

(c) Failure to Re-assess

[22]

The parents claim that the Society relied on the outstanding criminal proceedings to avoidmore timely investigatory due diligence in the protection proceedings. Had the Societyindependently assessed the case, particularly given the parents’ cooperation with theSociety (which it acknowledged) there was no basis to delay the father's reunificationwith the mother and children after the criminal proceedings against him ended onSeptember 30, 2016. Society efforts afterwards to plan the father's reintegration with hisfamily while the Society sought clarification from the Crown why the criminal chargeswere withdrawn were unacceptable to the parents, although more expansive access by thefather was informally allowed.

7

8

[23]

The Society maintained that, at least until the criminal charges had been resolved, it actedappropriately and progressively expanded the children's contact with their parents.

[24]

It is well settled that the costs may be awarded against a Society in child protectionproceedings although the range of circumstances in which such an award will be made iscircumscribed. In Children’s Aid Society of Algoma v. K.B. and T.S. 1 Gareau J.
observed,The test to attract costs against a Children’s Aid Society in a childprotection proceeding is a high one in that “there must beexceptional circumstances or unreasonable or unfair behaviour”.
The rationale for this approach is sound in that Children’s AidSocieties ought not to be discouraged by the sanction of costs incarrying out a statutory mandate imposed on it to protectvulnerable children in our society.

[25]

In Children's Aid Society of Hamilton v. K.L. and T.M.2 Chappel J. also explained why aspecial approach to costs in such cases was warranted,The special approach to costs claims against Children’s AidSocieties recognizes the extremely important and difficult taskwhich those agencies are entrusted with, and the challengingjudgment calls which child welfare professionals must make on aregular basis in carrying out their mandate to protect children.
Child protection staff must be encouraged to err on the side ofcaution in favour of protecting children in situations where theyhave reasonable grounds to do so, without having the added burdenwhenever they are required to make difficult judgment calls ofhaving to embark upon a taxing cost/benefit analysis as to whetherthey can financially afford to protect the child in question.

[26]

Chappel J. then summarized the general principles applicable,1. Child protection agencies do not enjoy immunity from acosts award.
2. However, the starting point in analyzing a claim for costsagainst a child protection agency is that the child welfareprofessionals should not be penalized for carrying out theirstatutory obligation to protect children.

1

Children’s Aid Society of Algoma v. K.B. and T.S., 2017 ONSC 1767
Children's Aid Society of Hamilton v. K.L. and T.M., 2014 ONSC 3679, 2014 CarswellOnt 8154, [2014] W.D.F.L.
2756, 241 A.C.W.S. (3d) 636
2

Law and Analysis

3. The approach to costs as against child welfare agenciesmust balance the importance of encouraging childprotection professionals to err on the side of protectingchildren and the need to ensure that those professionalsexercise good faith, due diligence and reason in carryingout their statutory mandate.
4. The high threshold of “bad faith” is not the standard bywhich to determine a claim for costs against a childprotection agency.
5. Costs will generally only be awarded against a Children’sAid Society in circumstances where the public at largewould perceive that the Society has acted in a patentlyunfair and indefensible manner.
6. A Society should not be sanctioned through costs for anerror in judgment, or in cases where the nature of the casemakes it very difficult to weigh and balance the evidenceand predict the legal outcome.
7. Important factors to consider in deciding whether costsagainst a Society are appropriate include the following:
i.

Has the Society conducted a thorough investigationof the issues in question?

ii.

Has the Society remained open minded aboutpossible versions of relevant events?

iii.

Has the Society reassessed its position as moreinformation became available?

iv.

Has the Society been respectful of the rights anddignity of the children and parents involved in thecase?

v.

In cases involving procedural impropriety on thepart of the Society, the level of protection fromcosts may be lower if the irregularity is not clearlyattributable to the Society’s efforts to diligentlycarry out its statutory mandate of protectingchildren.

9

[27]

In support of their costs claim the parents rely on Children's Aid Society of WaterlooRegion v. B.-C.(Z.)3 and Children's Aid Society Hamilton v. Si. R. and C.D.4 , cases inwhich costs were awarded against the respective Societies. In the former case, theSociety had failed its investigatory duties in not interviewing a child complainant beforestarting protection proceedings: in the latter, the Society failed to comply with disclosuretimelines which had been ordered, which procedural failure increased the mother's costs.

[28]

In Children's Aid Society of London and Middlesex v. T.S.-V.5 , Vogelsang J. awardedcosts against a Society for procedural misconduct when the Society apprehended childrenin circumstances where a Justice of the Peace had shortly before just dismissed anapprehension warrant for them.

[29]

None of these cases appears to have involved concurrent protection and criminalproceedings.

[30]

In Children’s Aid Society of Nipissing and Parry Sound v. L.O. and R.O.6 , the parentssought substantial indemnity costs in the amount of $22,614.07 for what they contendedwere a number of Society failures. These included inadequate investigation, overreliance on unproven allegations of sexual assault, and bad faith. In a careful analysis ofthe facts and law, Klein J. found that none of the important considerations listed byKatarynych J. in B.-C. (Z.), and which were further summarized by Chappel J. in K.L.
and T. M. above, warranted a costs award in that case. An important fact was delaycaused by the child's inability to meet independently with the Office of the Children'sLawyer, and not as a result of any procedural impropriety on the part of the Society.
There was some evidence in the case report about there being criminal charges of asexual nature against the father but it is unclear whether those were on-going when theProtection Application was dismissed or, if laid, their status.

[31]

The issue of the parents’ complaint in this case is that the Society ought to have morethoroughly investigated the allegations made by the surrogate’s children which theparents contend triggered the Protection Application. However, this ignores the fact thatthere were concurrent criminal proceedings of a serious nature involving both parents anda Society assessment made after interviewing the children which satisfied it that thechildren were at risk.

[32]

A review of the evidence leads to the following conclusions:
(a)

3

there is no question that there was delay by the Society providing the disclosurerequested by the parents and as ordered but those delays, with one exception, didnot prejudice the parents. The exception, which forms the principal basis of their
Children's Aid Society Hamilton v. Si.R and C.D., 2003 CanLII 2004 (ONSC)
5
Children's Aid Society of London and Middlesex v. T.S.-V., 2013 ONSC 4517, 2013 CarswellOnt 9202, [2013]
W.D.F.C. 3585, [2013] O.J. No. 3141 A.C.W.S. (3d) 1087
64

10

costs claim, was the Society's failure to obtain the CAST records before thefather's criminal charges were withdrawn on September 30, 2016. It cannot besaid though that the parents were unaware of the essential allegations by thesurrogate’s children as those were detailed in a protection worker's Affidavit
(paragraph 35) provided to the parents when the Application first came before thecourt on May 27, 2015;

[33]

(b)

the Protection Application dealt solely with the children, not with protectionconcerns involving the surrogate’s children. The Society was statutorily requiredto consider, and to rely on, the report made to it by CAST. While thatinformation was a contributing factor to the decision to start the ProtectionApplication it was not the only, or even determinative, factor. The criminalcharges against the parents coupled with the interviews of the children wereequally important factors;

(c)

until such time as the criminal charges were resolved, there was little likelihoodthat the Protection Application would have been permitted to be withdrawn. Theparents requested that the protection proceedings be delayed until the outstandingcriminal charges against them were resolved. The Society cannot be faulted forits acquiescence to those requests nor would it have been likely that a court wouldhave dismissed the Application or acceded to any motion that the parents couldhave brought to have the children returned to their care while those criminalproceedings were outstanding. The parents were justified, in particular the father,in their frustration with the family being reunited after his criminal charges werewithdrawn by the Society's failure to more thoroughly investigate beforehand, andobtain, the CAST file. But that observation must be viewed in the context of theSociety's reasonable and responsible interest in ascertaining the reasons why thecriminal charges against the father were withdrawn. This is the context in whichthe parent’s August 30, 2016 Offer to Settle must be viewed. The Endorsementmade by Kaufman J. on December 22, 2016 reflects this court's displeasure, notwith the Society, but with the Crown law offices in failing to more helpfullyrespond to the Society's concerns and to respect the parents’ interests.

The case law is clear that the bar is high when considering costs against a Society notinvolving unreasonable procedural failures but that, in appropriate circumstances, theSociety can be held accountable for procedural misconduct. In this case, no reasonableexplanation has been given why the Society failed to comply in a timely fashion with thedisclosure Orders made by Kaufman J., or requested by the parents. There is nosatisfactory reason why the parents were charged $373.47 for what appears to be thedisclosure containing the CAST file. While that disclosure may not have led to adifferent assessment of the Society's handling of this family’s file or even the veryunlikely withdrawal of the Protection Application before resolution of the outstandingcriminal proceedings, the fact is that the Society didn't comply with the Orders made byKaufman J. or respond more quickly to the not unreasonable disclose requests made by

11

12

[34]

Accordingly, the Society shall pay to the parents the sum of $1,373.47 inclusive of HST
comprising the sum of $1,000 for its failure to provide disclosure as ordered andrequested and $373.47 for the cost of the CAST file charged to the parents.

the parents’ counsel, which only increased the their costs. It is axiomatic that courtOrders are not suggestions; there should be consequences for Order non-compliance.

___________________________
Justice D.A. JarvisDate Released: May 25, 2017

13

