CITATION: Curtis Chandler v. Karl Hollett, 2017 ONSC 2969
COURT FILE NO.: CV-16-551560
DATE: 20170515

RE:

Curtis Chandler, Bruce Chandler, Chandler Capital Management, LLC and JakeMacLeod Family Trust, PlaintiffsAND:
Karl Hollett and Susanne Hollett, Defendants

BEFORE:

Madam Justice Kristjanson

COUNSEL: R. Seumas M. Woods, for the PlaintiffsMark A. Klaiman and Jeffrey Kroeker, for the DefendantsHEARD:

February 14, 2017
ENDORSEMENT

[1]
The plaintiffs seek summary judgment for the amount owing on a personal guaranteeexecuted by the defendants, Karl and Susanne Hollett, in connection with a share purchaseagreement (“SPA”) entered into between the plaintiffs and the Lavender Glen Holdings Inc.
(“Lavender Glen”), which is the defendants’ holding company. Through Lavender Glen, thedefendants purchased the shares of the plaintiffs’ solar energy companies. The purchase cameafter the plaintiffs provided the defendants with full disclosure about their business in theform of a data room of documents. All parties were represented by counsel, and negotiated adetailed SPA in which the plaintiffs made 96 specific representations, over 18 pages of theagreement. The SPA has an entire agreement clause. As part of the transaction, the defendantspersonally guaranteed Lavender Glen’s performance of its obligations under the SPA. Thedefendants failed to make the required payment. The defendants and Lavender Glenacknowledged the failure, and agreed to a new payment schedule which Lavender Glen againfailed to meet. The plaintiffs now move to enforce the obligation on the guarantee, in theamount of $2,118,475.08.

[2]
The defendants allege that the plaintiffs made false representations, before enteringinto the SPA, and as a result, Lavender Glen does not owe the amounts claimed, or owes alesser sum.

[3]
I find that there is no issue requiring a trial. The defendants' misrepresentation claimshave no merit. The evidence the defendants have adduced in support of their claims is vague,based on bald self-serving statements and cannot stand in light of the entire agreement clause.

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

- Page 2 There is no unconscionability in relation to the SPA or the guarantee.
summary judgment in favour of the plaintiffs.

This Court grants

The Plaintiffs and the Blackstone Companies

[4] The plaintiffs, Curtis Chandler, his father Bruce Chandler, the Chandlers’ holdingcompany Chandler Capital Management, LLC, and the Jake MacLeod Family Trust, owned aportfolio of companies (the “Blackstone Companies”) developing rooftop solar energyprojects. A rooftop solar energy project typically involves leased rooftop space on whichsolar panels are installed. The solar panels generate electricity which is then fed into Ontario’spower grid under the terms of what are known as “Feed-in Tariff” or “FIT” contracts with theIndependent Electricity System Owner (“IESO”), the entity that controls and operatesOntario’s electrical grid. Under a FIT contract, the IESO agrees to purchase the electricitygenerated by a particular project for a fixed rate on a long term basis.

[5]
The plaintiffs decided to sell their business in 2015. They set up an electronic dataroom containing hundreds of documents relating to their companies and the projects in whichthey were involved, and began to solicit interest from others in the solar energy business.

[6]
The data room contained copies of the FIT contracts the Blackstone Companies had inplace, pending contract offers from the IESO, partnership or shareholder agreements betweenthe Blackstone Companies and their business partners, the current budgets for the individualprojects, the engineering, procurement and construction contracts in place with the companieswith which the Blackstone Companies had contracted to design, procure and build theprojects, and the operations and maintenance contracts in place with the companies retained tooperate and maintain the projects. The projects were all at various stages.
The Defendants

[7]
The defendants, Mr. Karl Hollett and his wife Susanne Hollett, were also in the solarenergy business, and had their own portfolio of solar energy related companies with LavenderGlen at the top of the corporate pyramid.

[8]
Mr. Hollett, his staff and counsel, reviewed materials in the data room. During thepre-sale process, Mr. Hollett also spoke with the plaintiff Curtis Chandler, who headed theplaintiffs’ team on the sale, as well as Grant McArthur, who was at the time was VicePresident of the Blackstone Companies.
The Share Purchase Agreement

[9]
wouldSwansigned

Mr. Hollett and Curtis Chandler negotiated the final terms on which Lavender Glenacquire the Blackstone Companies. Lavender Glen was represented by CunninghamCarty Little & Bonham LLP throughout the SPA negotiation process. Mrs. Hollettthe agreement on Lavender Glen’s behalf.

The Parties

- Page 3 -

Entire Agreement Clause

[11] Section 16 of the SPA is an entire agreement clause which specifically provides thatthe written SPA and accompanying documents constitute the entire agreement between theparties and that there were no other agreements understandings, or representations:
This Agreement and the Transaction Documents constitute the entire agreementbetween the Parties with respect to the subject matter hereof and thereof andsupersede all prior agreements, understandings, negotiations and discussions,whether oral or written, of the Parties. There are no conditions, warranties,representations or other agreements between the Parties in connection with thesubject matter of this Agreement or the Transaction Documents (whether oral orwritten, express or implied, statutory or otherwise) except as specifically set out inthis Agreement or the Transaction Documents. (emphasis added)
Mutual Drafting

[12] Section 12 of the SPA is a mutual drafting clause which specifically states that theSPA had been carefully negotiated and drafted mutually by sophisticated parties representedby lawyers as follows:
The Parties are sophisticated and have been represented by lawyers who havecarefully negotiated the provisions hereof.
As a consequence, the Partiesacknowledge and agree that the presumptions of any laws or rules relating to theinterpretation of contacts against the drafter of any particular clause shall notapply to this Agreement and the Transaction Documents contemplated herein
(without specifically stating so in each such document) and therefore waive anysuch effects or interpretation hereunder or thereunder. (emphasis added)
Representations and Warranties of the Vendors/ Plaintiffs

[13] The plaintiffs made 96 specific representations in section 6 of the SPA. Therepresentations covered each of the specific companies being sold and the projects with whichthey were involved, dealing with a wide range of matters such as the authority to enter intothe SPA, ownership of the shares being sold, and the contractual framework and status of thevarious solar projects. In total, the representations cover 18 of the 62 pages comprising thetext of the SPA.

[10] The parties signed the SPA effective April 15, 2015. The Plaintiffs agreed to sell all oftheir shares of the Blackstone Companies to Lavender Glen for $3.8 million plus or minuscertain adjustments. Lavender Glen agreed to pay the plaintiffs in a series of installmentscommencing on April 28, 2015. Subject to certain adjustments and milestones, the balancewould be paid on dates in April, June and July, 2015, with potential for later adjustments.

- Page 4 -

[14] As security for Lavender Glen’s performance of its obligations under the SPA,Lavender Glen agreed to pledge back to the plaintiffs the shares of the Blackstone Companiesit was purchasing from them. The terms of the share pledge were set out in a share pledgeagreement made April 10, 2015.

[15] The Holletts also agreed to provide a personal guarantee (the “Guarantee”) underwhich they irrevocably guaranteed Lavender Glen’s performance of its obligations under theSPA. The Guarantee specifically provided that it was an absolute, primary, direct andindependent obligation, and was not subject to any right of set-off, recoupment orcounterclaim as against the plaintiffs, apart from certain specified situations. Under section 11
of the Guarantee, the defendants agreed to reimburse the plaintiffs for their “out-of-pocket”
legal fees, disbursements, taxes and other expenses reasonably incurred in enforcingperformance of Lavender Glen’s obligations under the SPA and the defendants’ obligationsunder the Guarantee. The Guarantee is one of the Transaction Documents and thus subject tothe entire agreement clause.
Transaction Closes

[16] The sale closed on April 15, 2015, giving the defendants control of the BlackstoneCompanies and their solar projects through Lavender Glen. Lavender Glen operated theBlackstone Companies out of the same office premises that the Blackstone Companies hadpreviously occupied. As part of the sale, the plaintiffs turned over all the servers and computerequipment used by the Blackstone Companies to Mr. Hollett and Lavender Glen, giving themaccess to all of the companies’ emails, staff, books and records.

[17] Once the sale closed, Grant McArthur (who the defendants say was a source of one ofthe pre-contractual misrepresentations) ceased to work for the plaintiffs. Instead, he workedfor a company that was ultimately controlled by the defendants. Mr. McArthur continued towork for the defendants until he left the Blackstone Companies in August 2016.
Failure to Make the Payments and July, 2015 Amendment to the SPA

[18] Lavender Glen failed to make the required payments on time, or in the full amounts.
The parties entered in an amending agreement in July 2015. Under the terms of the July 2015
Amendment, the cash component of the Purchase Price was increased from $3,800,000 to
$4,116,400. The $4,116,400 was to be paid in a series of installments. Lavender Glen failedto comply with the payment terms of the July 2015 Amendment.

[19] Given Lavender Glen’s failure to make both the $687,500 payment due on August 31,2015 and the $810,700 payment due on September 30, 2015, Curtis Chandler issued the firstof what would become a series of default notices on October 2, 2015, and attempted to obtainpayment.

The Guarantee and Share Pledge Agreement

- Page 5 -

[21] Lavender Glen had made no further payments as of the middle of November. WhenMr. Chandler and his lawyers pressed Mr. Hollett’s lawyer Ms. Asbreuk for details onNovember 18, 2015, she said her clients were on the verge of completing the close-outfinancing. The parties set up a call for Mr. Hollett to brief them, but he failed to show up forit.

[22] Given the continued lack of any payment and Mr. Hollett’s failure to attend theplanned call, on November 20, 2015, the plaintiffs’ lawyers sent Lavender Glen and itscounsel notice of the plaintiffs’ intention to exercise their rights under the Share PledgeAgreement. Lavender Glen responded, in the form of a letter from its lawyer Ms. Asbreukdated November 23, 2015, in which she denied that her client was in default of any of itsobligations under the SPA, claimed that her clients had overpaid the and for the first timesubmitted that some of the representations and warranties in the SPA, including therepresentation about the budgets for the FIT 2.0 projects, were not true, and that her client hadsuffered damages as a result. She provided a list of what Lavender Glen said required anadjustment to the Purchase Price.

[23] The plaintiffs issued a second notice of default on November 25, 2015 in which theyreiterated that Lavender Glen had not made the payments it was required to make on August31, 2015 and September 30, 2015, and confirmed that it remained in default under the SPA.

[24] The plaintiffs issued a third notice of default on December 21, 2015. By this time,Lavender Glen owed the plaintiffs at least $2 million; Mr. Hollett acknowledged on his crossexamination that he did not have the money.
The Acknowledgment and Agreement

[25] The plaintiffs entered into a further agreement amending the SPA with Mr. Hollett andLavender Glen (the “Acknowledgment and Agreement”) made April 7, 2016. Mr. Hollettpersonally signed the document on behalf of Lavender Glen. Cunningham Swan was stillacting at that point.

[26] In the Acknowledgment and Agreement, Lavender Glen agreed that all of theconditions precedent to the payment of amounts pursuant to Sections 4.5(b) and (c) of theSPA had been fully satisfied, and agreed to pay the plaintiffs outstanding amounts as stated inthe Acknowledgment and Agreement, on a revised schedule.

[27] Commencing two weeks after signing the Acknowledgment and Agreement, LavenderGlen again failed to make the payments required under the Acknowledgment and Agreement.
In total, Lavender Glen has failed to pay the plaintiffs a total of $2,118,475.08. On his crossexamination, Mr. Hollett admitted that in the Acknowledgment and Agreement he agreed that

[20] Mr. Hollett continued to ask for more time to pay. On October 19, 2015, Mr. Hollettclaimed that he was in the process of obtaining close-out financing and was trying to sellsome of the projects. Once he had done that he would be able to pay the plaintiffs the moneyowed them.

- Page 6 all the amounts set out in it were owing and promised to pay them. He also admitted thatnone of those amounts have been paid.

[28] The plaintiffs commenced this action by statement of claim issued on April 25, 2016.
Cunningham Swan served a statement of defence dated May 26, 2016 on behalf of thedefendants. On August 29, 2016, Cunningham Swan obtained an order removing the firm aslawyers of record for the defendants. The defendants did not formally appoint new lawyersuntil after the original return date for this motion.

[29] The plaintiffs commenced this action before Lavender Glen failed to make thepayments due on May 6, 2016 and June 9, 2016. Part of the relief sought on this motion isleave to amend the statement of claim at the hearing to claim the missed payments due onthose dates, which I grant.

[30] At some point in the summer of 2016, Lavender Glen’s operating subsidiariesStrathcona and FATH PV, ceased to carry on any active business. In September 2016, bothRBC and BDC made demands for payment of the loans they each made to Strathcona andFATH PV, over $4 million on various facilities. Both RBC and BDC made applications forthe appointment of receivers, and ultimately a receiver was appointed.
ANALYSIS
ISSUE I: Should the Plaintiffs be granted leave to amend the Statement of Claim?

[31] Under Rule 26.01, the Court must grant leave to amend a pleading on such terms arejust, unless prejudice would result that could not be compensated by cost or an adjournment.

[32] The plaintiffs seek leave to increase the amount claimed to include those paymentswhich fell due after the original issuance of the statement of claim and which were not made,increasing the total claimed from $1,162,292.15 to $2,118,475.08.

[33] The plaintiffs moved for leave to amend as part of their original notice of motionwhich was served on the defendants in July 2016. I find that the defendants are notprejudiced; the amendment increases the size of the claim without changing the basis for theclaim. All the defences advanced in the statement of defence apply to the increased claim asthey did to the original one. As such, I grant the plaintiffs leave to amend the statement ofclaim and proceed to deal with the motion for summary judgment on the claim as amended.

The Statement of Claim and Subsequent Events

- Page 7 Issue II: Should Summary Judgment be granted?

[34] Rule 20.04(2)(a) of the Rules of Civil Procedure provides that the court shall grantsummary judgment if: "the court is satisfied that there is no genuine issue requiring a trialwith respect to a claim or defence." The Supreme Court in Hryniak held at para. 49:
There will be no genuine issue requiring a trial when the judge is able to reach afair and just determination on the merits on a motion for summaryjudgment. This will be the case when the process (1) allows the judge to makethe necessary findings of fact, (2) allows the judge to apply the law to the facts,and (3) is a proportionate, more expeditious and less expensive means to achievea just result.

[35] A responding party may not rest solely on the allegations or denials in the party’spleadings, but “must set out, in affidavit material or other evidence, specific facts showingthat there is a genuine issue requiring a trial”: Rule 20.0(2). Each side must “put its best footforward” with respect to the existence or non-existence of material issues to be tried. A courtis entitled to assume that the record contains all the evidence that the parties would present ifthe matter proceeded to trial: Sweda Farms Ltd. v. Egg Farmers of Ontario, 2014 ONSC 1200
(ONSC) at paras. 26-27; aff’d 2014 ONCA 878 (Ont. C.A.).

[36] The court should first determine if there is a genuine issue requiring trial based onlyon the evidence in the motion record, without using the fact-finding powers set out in Rule20.04(2.1) and (2.2). The analysis of whether there is a genuine issue requiring a trial shouldbe done by reviewing the factual record and granting summary judgment if there is sufficientevidence to fairly and justly adjudicate the dispute and summary judgment would be a timely,affordable and proportionate procedure. If there appears to be a genuine issue requiring a trial,then the court should determine if the need for a trial can be avoided by using the fact-findingpowers under Rule 20.04. Their use will not be against the interest of justice if their use willlead to a fair and just result and will serve the goals of timeliness, affordability andproportionality in light of the litigation as a whole.

[37] I have determined that there is no genuine issue requiring trial based on the evidencefiled on the motion. For the reasons set out below I grant summary judgment as there issufficient evidence to fairly and justly adjudicate the dispute, and a summary judgment is atimely, affordable and proportionate procedure.
Elements the Plaintiffs Must Establish to Obtain Judgment

[38] To obtain judgment on their claim, the plaintiffs must establish, on the evidencecurrently before this Court, that:
(a)

both the SPA and the Guarantee are legally binding on the parties which enteredinto them;

The General Test for Summary Judgment

(b)

the SPA, as amended, requires Lavender Glen to pay the plaintiffs $2,118,475.08
in addition to the monies paid thus far, and Lavender Glen has not paid thismoney’

(c)

the defendants guaranteed Lavender Glen’s performance of its obligations underthe SPA and therefore are liable to the plaintiffs in the event that Lavender Glenfails to perform its obligations under the SPA, and in particular fails to pay theplaintiffs money due them under the SPA; and,

(d)

the defendants have not adduced evidence to support any valid defence that wouldeliminate or reduce Lavender Glen’s obligations to the plaintiffs, and by extensionthe defendants’ obligations under the Guarantee.

Unchallenged Evidence

[39] The evidence before the Court is that Lavender Glen freely entered into the SPA andthe Holletts freely entered into the Guarantee. Neither Lavender Glen nor the Hollettschallenge that they signed the SPA and the Guarantee. Mr. Hollett has admitted thatLavender Glen has not paid the plaintiffs the monies due to it under the SPA as amended bythe Acknowledgement and Agreement, the total amount of which is $2,118,475.08. On theevidence before the Court, the plaintiffs have satisfied the first three requirements set outabove.

[40] The plaintiffs have established that the SPA, as amended by the Acknowledgment andAgreement, requires Lavender Glen to pay the plaintiffs $2,118,475.08, the SPA is binding onLavender Glen; and Lavender Glen owes and has not paid this amount as required. Theplaintiffs have established that the Holletts entered into the Guarantee, and that it is bindingon the Holletts. The defendants guaranteed the performance of Lavender Glen’s obligationsunder the SPA, and are liable for the failure of Lavender Glen to pay moneys owed to theplaintiffs under the Guarantee.
The Defendants’ Defence: Misrepresentations by the Plaintiffs

[41] The only real issue on this motion is whether the defendants have adduced sufficientevidence supporting a valid defence that would eliminate or reduce Lavender Glen’sobligations to the plaintiffs and thus the defendants’ obligations under the Guarantee. As setout in their statement of defence and supporting affidavits, the defendants allege that theplaintiffs made a series of pre-contractual misrepresentations that disqualify the plaintiffsfrom enforcing the payment provisions of the SPA and thus disqualify them from enforcingthe Guarantee.
The Alleged Representations

[42] In his affidavit, Mr. Hollett claims that at some point prior to execution of the SPA theplaintiffs, and in one case Mr. McArthur, made a number of misrepresentations to him aboutthe status of the projects which he later discovered were not true. In oral argument, counsel

- Page 8 -

- Page 9 -

(1)

First Nations Projects Contracts

[43] Mr. Hollett claims that prior to the execution of the SPA, Grant McArthur on behalf ofthe plaintiffs represented that “agreements had been reached and entered into by First NationsBands in respect of approved IESO projects.” In his affidavit, he goes on to allege that the
“Agreement that was represented by the Plaintiffs to have been concluded with the FirstNations Band was such that the Band would own 51% of the project on paper, but would onlyreceive 7.5% of the net profits generated from the projects,” which turned out to be inaccurate
(emphasis added).

[44] As with other representations relied on in the pleadings and affidavit evidence, Mr.Hollett does not provide any particulars of the circumstances as to when, where, to whom andhow the alleged representations were made. The representation refers both to plural andsingular (Bands and Band; agreements and agreement). Apart from the representationspecifically said to have been made by Mr. McArthur (that there were binding agreementswith Bands), details with respect to a Band receiving 7.5% of net profits are said to have been
“represented by the Plaintiffs”, again without identifying who, when and how therepresentations were made. None of the representations were incorporated into the SPA.

[45] Mr. Hollett’s evidence is that he only became aware of the misrepresentation after theAcknowledgment and Agreement, a year after taking control of the Blackstone Companies,during which time he had complete access to both Mr. McArthur and the full records of thecompanies he had acquired. This is not credible, or speaks to a complete lack of diligence.

[46] The SPA does not contain any representation on this issue. In contrast to Mr. Hollett’svague allegations, the plaintiffs have produced written evidence of actual agreements in placewith First Nations that were in the data room for the defendants and their deal team to reviewand assess before Lavender Glen entered into the SPA.

[47] Mr. Hollett’s claim of misrepresentations about the relationships with the First NationsBands are inconsistent with both the entire agreement clause of the SPA and Lavender Glen’sacknowledgment in the Acknowledgment and Agreement that all of the pre-conditions for thepayments due to the plaintiffs had been satisfied.
ArcStar Misrepresentation

[48] Mr. Hollett swore: “I was advised by Curtis Chandler himself and the Plaintiffs beforethe SPA was executed that an agreement was in place with ArcStar and that they were goingto participate in the development of the project.” He later refers also refers to “projects”. Theexact nature of the representation regarding the project or projects is unclear, and there are nodetails with respect to who/what/where/when the representation about ArcStar’s participation

for the defendant conceded that a number of misrepresentations originally raised in thepleadings and affidavit evidence were known before the date of the Acknowledgment andAgreement, and are not being pursued. Only two alleged misrepresentations remain in issuerelating to the First Nations Projects and the ArcStar Agreement.

- Page 10 -

[49] There were no specific representations in the SPA to the effect that the plaintiffs hadan agreement in place with Arcstar and that Arcstar was going to participate in thedevelopment of “the project” or projects with the plaintiffs.
The agreements that theBlackstone Companies did have in place with Arcstar were in the data room and Mr. Hollettadmitted on cross examination that the plaintiffs had included those agreements in the dataroom.

[50] Given the specific representations the plaintiffs made in the SPA, as well as the factthat the actual agreements that were in place with Arcstar were all in the data room, Mr.Hollett’s vague claim that someone represented something different at some unspecified time,does not raise a genuine issue requiring a trial.

[51] The only evidence that the plaintiffs made any pre-contractual representations to thedefendants at all comes from the affidavit evidence of Mr. Hollett. The details of the allegedmisrepresentations are vague, attributed in most cases simply to “the Plaintiffs” (who includetwo individuals, a corporation, and a trust), with no indication as to the date, time or place ofthe alleged misrepresentations. There is no contemporaneous documentary evidence of themisrepresentations having been made at the time, or at all.
Summary Findings

[52] The alleged misrepresentations are unclear as to who made the representations, where,when, to whom, and exactly what was said, and are bereft of information as to context. Theywere not raised immediately; there are vague suggestions and self-serving explanations in theaffidavit as to the delay in raising the issues. I have already noted that the vendors (plaintiffs)v. Zaakir, 2013 ONSC 7646 (SCJ).

in the development of unidentified projects involving First Nations was made. Mr. Chandlerdenies that he or any of the other plaintiffs ever made such a representation.

- Page 11 -

[53] The defendants have pleaded that the plaintiffs made representations and warrantieswhich were untrue, incorrect and incomplete, and in so doing, breached their obligationsunder the contract. The pleadings are restricted to contractual defences, and do not advanceclaims of tort or fraud. However, the defendants sought to argue tortious misrepresentation,to take the claim outside the contractual bar.
The first issue, of course, is whether as a matter of interpretation the exclusionclause even applies to the circumstances established in evidence. This will dependon the Court's assessment of the intention of the parties as expressed in thecontract. If the exclusion clause does not apply, there is obviously no need toproceed further with this analysis. If the exclusion clause applies, the second issueis whether the exclusion clause was unconscionable at the time the contract wasmade, "as might arise from situations of unequal bargaining power between theparties" (Hunter, at p. 462). This second issue has to do with contract formation,not breach.
If the exclusion clause is held to be valid and applicable, the Court may undertakea third enquiry, namely whether the Court should nevertheless refuse to enforcethe valid exclusion clause because of the existence of an overriding public policy,proof of which lies on the party seeking to avoid enforcement of the clause, thatoutweighs the very strong public interest in the enforcement of contracts.
Entire Agreement Clause

[55] As noted earlier, Lavender Glen specifically agreed that the SPA constituted theentirety of the agreement between the parties, and that there were in fact no pre-contractualrepresentations. The defendants knew of this, having negotiated and signed the SPA and theGuarantee. The courts have routinely given effect to such clauses in the face of allegationsbased on pre-contractual representations, particularly in situations involving commercialcontracts between sophisticated businesspeople represented by competent counsel: seeGutierrez v. Tropic International Ltd., [2010] O.J. No. 3079 (C.A.); Carevest Capital Inc. v.
North Tech Electronics Ltd., [2010] O.J. No. 1939 (Div. Ct.); Hammer v. Cleeves, 2015
ONSC 2547.

[56] That is exactly the case here. As reasonably sophisticated businesspeople, representedby counsel who negotiated a relatively complex final share purchase agreement, thedefendants cannot escape from Lavender Glen’s agreement. Whatever may or may not havebeen said before the SPA, it ceased to have any legal consequence after the parties signed theSPA.

Tortious Misrepresentation and Fraud

[57] This is all the more true when one considers the 18 pages of representations containedin the SPA. None of what the defendants now say are critical representations wereincorporated into the SPA. In those circumstances, and without any explanation from thedefendants as to why such critical representations are not in the SPA, even if one accepts Mr.Hollett’s evidence that the representations were made, they cannot be given any legal force inlight of the entire agreement clause.

[58] Even if the defendants were able to escape the consequences of the entire agreementclause, there is also the Acknowledgment and Agreement which Lavender Glen signed inApril 2016, almost a year after acquiring the Blackstone Companies.

[59] Like the entire agreement clause of the SPA, the terms of the Acknowledgment andAgreement are totally at odds with the current misrepresentation claims. Even if Mr. Hollettand Lavender Glen really believed that the plaintiffs had made misrepresentations to them, bysigning the Acknowledgment and Agreement Lavender Glen, and by extension Mr. and Mrs.Hollett, abandoned any ability to complain about them.

[60] The courts routinely give effect to entire agreement clauses, precisely to prevent thistype of litigation, and to ensure the efficacy and efficiency of commercial arrangements.
Here, the entire agreement clause applies to exclude the reliance on pre-contractualrepresentations, since it is an express term of the contract that pre-contractual representationsdo not form part of the contract: Gutierrez v. Tropic International Ltd., 162 O.A.C. 247, 2002
CarswellOnt 2599 (C.A.) at paras. 24-25.
Inquiry into Unconscionability/Public Policy

[61] I then inquire into the second and third aspects. The Court of Appeal has recognizedthat under the doctrine of unconscionability, an entire agreement clause will be unenforceableABB Inc., 2007 SCC 50, [2007] 3 S.C.R. 461 (SCC) at para. 82.

[62] There is no unconscionability here. The parties were all commercially sophisticated.
They were all represented by counsel. They specifically agreed to the Mutual Drafting Clauseconfirming these points. The defendants conducted due diligence and had access to the dataroom. They negotiated a very detailed contract. The parties specifically negotiated 18 pagesof vendor representations, but not the representations now relied on. After a year in whichMr. Hollett and Lavender Glen owned the shares and had full access to all the staff, books andrecords, they did not raise the concerns in a timely manner, and they executed theAcknowledgment and Agreement. There are no public policy reasons, on the facts of thiscase, which would lead the court to conclude that the entire agreement clause should not beenforced.

[63] On this motion, for the first time, the defendants submit it is “arguable that themisrepresentations made were reckless or fraudulent misrepresentations in that they were

- Page 12 -

- Page 13 -

Provided that the particulars and material facts relied upon for a fraudulentmisrepresentation claim are pleaded it is not essential that the word “fraud” or
“fraudulent” be used: see Shoppers Drug Mart Inc. v. 6470360 Canada Inc., 2014

[64] In this case, the particulars and material facts relied upon fall far short of a pleading offraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, and the plaintiffs were taken by surprise. The allegationof fraud was not put to Curtis Chandler on cross-examinations on affidavit. The argument asto fraud is not properly advanced in the circumstances, although it may well affect the scale ofcosts. In any event, the defendants have failed to make out the allegations of fraud; theevidence of Mr. Hollett does not cross that threshold.

[42]
Reckless misrepresentation is a kind of fraudulent misrepresentation:(whether through knowledge or recklessness); (3) the false representation causedthe plaintiff to act; and (4) the plaintiff’s actions resulted in a loss”: Combined AirMechanical Services Inc. v. Flesch, 2014 SCC 8 (CanLII), [2014] 1 S.C.R. 126, atpara. 21.

[43]
The third element of civil fraud summarized in Combined Air entailsconsidering inducement and reliance. As the Divisional Court noted in respect ofthe lenders’ claims in Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce v. Deloitte &“The claims of negligent and reckless misrepresentation both require the plaintiffsto prove at trial that there have been representations of fact by each of thedefendants upon which they relied.”

[66] I find that there is no basis in the evidence to find that the plaintiffs fraudulentlymisrepresented anything to the defendants or Lavender Glen. In respect of the ArcStar andFirst Nations misrepresentations, the only evidence is the bald allegations, lacking specificity,in Mr. Hollett’s affidavit evidence. The plaintiffs deny the representations were made. The

knowingly made and were not accurate.” The first mention of “reckless or fraudulent”
misrepresentations is in the factum of the defendants, and appears nowhere in the pleadings oraffidavit evidence. The Court of Appeal has allowed claims of fraudulent misrepresentation tobe argued even if not pleaded, holding in Singh v. Trump at para. 142:

- Page 14 -

Conclusion

[67] This Court has sufficient evidence before it to grant the plaintiffs summary judgmentagainst the defendants on the Guarantee. There is no issue that Lavender Glen entered into abinding agreement to purchase the shares of the Blackstone Companies owned by theplaintiffs, or that the defendants agreed to guarantee Lavender Glen’s performance of itsobligations. There is no issue that Lavender Glen received those shares and then failed to payall the money due for them under the SPA as amended.

[68] The defendants claim that judgment should not be granted against them because ofpre-contractual representations they allege were made to them. The Court has ample evidencein the record before it to reject the defendants’ claims. No trial is necessary for it to do so. Inthose circumstances the Court should grant the plaintiffs the relief they seek, and order thedefendants to pay them the money the defendants owe under the Guarantee, plus interest andcosts.

[69] For the reasons set out above, I find that the alleged misrepresentations lack an air ofreality; they do not contain any details as to who/what/where/when; there is nocontemporaneous documentation; there is no explanation as to why there was no attempt toensure that the representations were captured in the specifically tailored 18 pages of vendorrepresentations contained in the SPA in the course of the long due diligence process; they aresimply not concrete.
The only evidence is that of Mr. Hollett, and the allegedmisrepresentations amount to little more than self-supporting bare allegations. The defendantshave not established that the pre-contractual representations were false and inaccurate, or anytheory of the case that would render them legally binding. There is reason to doubt that therepresentations were even made. However, even if made, the defendants cannot rely on suchrepresentations in light of the Entire Agreement Clause and the Acknowledgment andAgreement.

[70] In the result, I grant summary judgment in favour of the plaintiffs. I grant leave toamend the Statement of Claim to award the plaintiffs judgment in the full amount of
$2,118,475.08 plus prejudgment interest.

[71] If the parties are unable to agree on costs, the plaintiffs may make brief submissions tome through my assistant by May 23, and the defendants by June 2.

defendants have not established on the evidence that (a) the misrepresentations were made, orthat the representations made were untrue; (b) that the plaintiff makers knew the statementswere untrue; or (c) that the false representations were relied on by the defendants/LavenderGlen.

- Page 15 -

Date: May 15, 2017

Kristjanson J.

