ONTARIO

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B E T W E E N:
Gurpreet Singh Doal

- and -

Bajwinder Kaur

) Deepa Singh, for the Applicant
Applicant )
) Preet Kaler, for the Respondent
Respondent )
) HEARD: April 3, 4, 5, 6, 2017

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

M. J. Donohue, J

CITATION: Daol v Kaur, 2017 ONSC 3182
COURT FILE NO.: FS-14-4958-00
DATE: 20170524

-2-

[1]

This family law dispute dealt largely with whether there should be an

order for joint custody or sole custody to the respondent mother for the decisionmaking regarding the parties’ four-year-old son.

[2]

At the opening of this brief trial it appeared to me that the parties were in

agreement on a great number of issues. Once they prepared and filed their draftorders it became more apparent. By the end of the second day, the parties hadan extensive draft order on agreed issues.

This narrowed the issues for trial

considerably, reduced animosity between the parties, and saved expense toeach of the parties and the court’s time.

[3]

The issues narrowed down to the following;
(a) Whether the father owes past daycare expenses of $4,800;
(b) How section 7 expenses should be paid;
(c) Whether the father should pay child support for the six months afterseparation;
(d) Whether the father may be allowed to travel with the child outside ofCanada.

OVERVIEW

-3-

the child.

[4]

The focus of the evidence was on joint custody as opposed to sole

custody to Ms. Kaur.
BACKGROUND OF THEIR MARRIAGE

[5]

Ms. Kaur was born and raised in India.

She became a Canadian citizen.

She came to Canada in 2006.

This was an arranged marriage between

herself and Mr. Doal, arranged by Ms. Kaur’s family in India.

Mr. Doal was

working in India as a college mathematics professor at the time the partiesmarried.

[6]

The couple became acquainted by phone for three months.

Then Ms.

Kaur travelled to India to meet and marry Mr. Doal. They met before the weddingin February 2011.

Ms. Kaur was not forced to marry him.

Her first marriage

ended in divorce and she was anxious to be married and have a family.

[7]

In India, they were together for approximately two months.

honeymoon and then visited with relatives.

They had a

The parties started growing their

family right away. Ms. Kaur became pregnant but miscarried shortly afterward.

(e) Whether there should be an order for joint custody or sole custody of

-4-

Ms. Kaur testified that there were some arguments with her in-laws about

the dowry she was to provide, but the demands were withdrawn as Ms. Kaur wassponsoring their son to Canada.

[9]

Ms. Kaur returned to Canada in May 2011 and she began the

sponsorship process for Mr. Doal. For the following nine months, they spoke onthe phone. Mr. Doal said they spoke almost daily during this time.

[10]

He arrived in Canada in February 2012 and within three weeks he found

a job as a general labourer.

He admits that was he was initially not very happy

as he was an educated man. Ms. Kaur testified that he would have preferred tostudy first in Canada, but she explained to him that everyone starts out by doinggeneral labour work.

[11]

Both wanted to continue a life together. In describing their marriage over

the next two and a half years, Ms. Kaur said they argued all the time. Mr. Doalagreed that they would argue but then they would be “united again.”

[12]

Their son was born in November 2012.

when the baby was three months old.

Mr. Doal’s mother came to help

Ms. Kaur returned to work part time for

four months while her mother-in-law provided childcare.

[8]

-5Around June 2013, when the child was seven months old, Mr. Doal’s

mother returned to India and Ms. Kaur began full time work. She took the child toa third-party daycare but terminated this after a few days as the child wasunhappy.

Mr. Doal and Ms. Kaur arranged their respective work schedules so

that they could share the childcare responsibilities while the other was at work.

[14]

This shared parental childcare arrangement continued for 11 months until

August 2014.

At that time Ms. Kaur’s parents arrived in Canada, following Ms.

Kaur’s successful application to sponsor them.
Doal said they criticized and harassed him.

When her parents arrived, Mr.Within a few weeks, he left the

matrimonial home.

[15]

Mr. Doal is now 33. Ms. Kaur is 42. The child is 4 ½.

DISPUTED ISSUES
(a)

[16]

Whether the father owes past daycare expenses of $4,800;It is not disputed that Mr. Doal minded the child while the parties resided

together and Ms. Kaur was working. When he moved out of the home, the childwas two and a half years old. Care for the child was needed.

Ms. Kaur seeks

reimbursement for daycare expenses for the two years following the parties’
separation, calculated below.

[13]

-6-

Ms. Kaur chose to pay her mother $600 per month and relied on

cancelled cheques and her tax return in support of her claim for reimbursement.
She claims two years of daycare expenses until the child began school inSeptember 2016. Had Ms. Kaur sought market-price childcare, it is not disputedby Mr. Doal that it would cost more than $600 per month.

[18]

Mr. Doal objects to contributing to this expense for two reasons.

[19]

First, he suggested that the cheques by Ms. Kaur were not “real”

because, in their culture grandparents do not charge to mind their grandchildren,just as his mother did not charge anything. I do not find his position surprising asMs. Kaur sponsored her parents to Canada, they are dependent on her, do notdrive, and even now are not employed outside the home.

[20]

As well, he did not hear of this expense being incurred until he was in

court more than a year later.

[21]

Second, Mr. Doal suggested that he would have preferred that their child

be cared for by a certified daycare provider who would give quality childcare aswell as exposure to Canadian culture and education.

He agreed, however, that

this would cost closer to $1,000 per month. As he was concurrently seeking the

[17]

-7-

this was not a reasonable argument in the circumstances.

[22]

It does not appear that he made any inquiry as to who would take his

place as caregiver and assumed that his in-laws would serve at no cost. He left itto Ms. Kaur to manage.

[23]

Ms. Kaur advises that she paid $14,400 in total, of which Mr. Doal’s

share would be $7,200.

She recognizes that she received a tax benefit from

being able to claim the payments on her tax returns and so reduces the claim byone-third to $4,800. This amounts to $200 per month from Mr. Doal for his shareof the childcare services.

I consider this to be a modest claim for necessary

services.

[24]

Mr. Doal’s concern that the payments made to Ms. Kaur’s parents were

not “real” should be tempered by the knowledge that Ms. Kaur’s parents in factprovided childcare for more than two years, and Ms. Kaur has covered all of thedirect and indirect costs associated with having her parents available to providefulltime childcare.

There are real costs to having these care providers available,

one way or another.

court’s indulgence in waiving past child support due to his financial constraints,

-8-

I order Mr. Doal to pay the past daycare expenses of $4,800. This is to

be paid in monthly installments of $100 commencing on June 1, 2017.

[26]

Ms. Kaur is not claiming daycare expenses for the period after the child

began full time school, while her parents provided and continue to providechildcare.
(b)

[27]

How section 7 expenses should be paid;Mr. Doal agreed to an order to equally share the section 7 expenses but

wishes to pay the service provider directly.

In this way, he would be aware of

what activities the child is involved with and he could attend to see the child’sperformance.

[28]

In my view, this unduly complicates payment of such extraordinary

expenses when Ms. Kaur may need to promptly pay an expense in order tosecure their child’s enrollment in a program.

[29]

The same result that Mr. Doal seeks may be obtained by an order that

each parent advise the other in writing of what extracurricular activity the child isenrolled in, with information of the dates and times of the proposed activity.

[25]

-9-

In accordance with the wording proposed by the parties, I order, on

consent, that Mr. Doal shall pay 50% of special and extraordinary expensesrelating to the child, within 30 days of being provided proof thereof.

[31]

I further order that each parent is to advise the other in writing what

extracurricular activity the child is enrolled in, with particulars of its dates andtimes, at least 7 days before any activity is to start.

[32]

If there is no agreement as to the payment of special and extraordinary

expenses in relation to the child, either party may bring a motion on notice to theother party to address the issue.
(c)

[33]

Whether the father should pay past child support for the six monthsafter separation;Mr. Doal agrees that Guideline child support between the date of

separation and March 2017 amounts to $2,353. However, he asks that the courtnot order him to pay child support for the first few months following the parties’
separation.

[34]

Mr. Doal submitted that he experienced financial hardship immediately

following separation. However, he did not provide evidence of financial hardshipthat would justify relief from his obligation to pay child support. I can understandthat he had a number of expenses to set up his new accommodations at the

[30]

- 10 -

child. That is the priority.

[35]

I order Mr. Doal to pay the outstanding support of $2,353.

This shall be

paid in monthly installments of $50 commencing June 1, 2017.
(d)

Whether the father may be allowed to travel with the child outside ofCanada.

[36]

In 2015 Ms. Kaur laid a criminal charge in India as against Mr. Doal and

his parents relating to the failed marriage.
false and is under appeal.

Mr. Doal testified that the charge is

He said there is the potential that he would be

incarcerated if he travels to India.

[37]

Mr. Doal consented to Ms. Kaur travelling with the child outside of

Canada and he seeks a similar order to international travel.

He wishes, in

particular, to travel to India.

[38]

In light of his evidence that he may be arrested there, I am not prepared

to make an order allowing international travel with the child.

I make this order

without prejudice to his applying to vary this order in future, upon demonstratingthat he is not liable to arrest in India.

There is no suggestion of potential

time, but this does not relieve him of his responsibility to support the parties’

- 11 The issue is simply the child’s safety if his father is

potentially liable to arrest when overseas.

(e) Whether there should be an order for joint or sole custody of the child.

[39]

Ms. Kaur seeks an order for sole custody of the child to her.

seeks an order for joint custody.

Mr. Doal

The parties have worked out residence and

access as well as a number of other issues, on consent.

[40]

It is agreed that the best interests of the child govern this decision. Are

the parents able to communicate and compromise, putting their child’s interestsfirst such that major decisions affecting the child’s health and education can bereached?

If not, then sole-decision making by the primary resident parent may

best serve the child’s interests.
Positions of the Parties

[41]

Ms. Kaur gave evidence that during their time together in Canada from

February 2012 to August 2014, the parties were always arguing.

For example,

Mr. Doal reviewed her bank accounts and questioned payments she made evenbefore they were married. She told him she was sending money to family inIndia.

In response, Mr. Doal said that he would also want to send money to his

abduction in this case.

- 12 -

appeared to accept Mr. Doal’s position with respect to sending money to family inIndia.

[42]

In another example, Ms. Kaur said Mr. Doal insisted that he be named on

title for their car.

However, she then admitted that he shared the cost of

insurance and maintenance and that they both had the use of the car.

[43]

Ms. Kaur testified that Mr. Doal made demands of her to cook him

particular dishes and do the cleaning even when she was just home from hospitalafter

the

child’s

birth.

These

examples,

although

illustrative

of

some

disagreement generally throughout the marriage, are not particularly helpful indeciding the issue of child custody.
Decisions Regarding the Child

[44]

Ms. Kaur cited two occasions where they argued over a decision

regarding their child. Shortly after the child was born, Ms. Kaur wanted to put thechild tax benefit into an RESP.

Mr. Doal refused to do so.

Ms. Kaur admitted

that Mr. Doal was not working at that time and that he wanted the money to beused for the household expenses. It does not appear that the issue was revisitedonce he became employed.

family in India. Although this was Ms. Kaur’s example of the parties’ arguing, she

[45]

The other dispute she described was following a medical incident.

The

child became ill and both parents took him to emergency that evening.

The

doctor there suspected a seizure may have occurred and recommended the childsee a paediatrician.

Ms. Kaur’s evidence was that Mr. Doal said it was

unnecessary to bring the child to a paediatrician because the child had a familydoctor.

Ms. Kaur took the child to a paediatrician.

Doal interfered or objected to her doing so.

It does not appear that Mr.I note that the treatment

recommended was to give the child baby Tylenol when the child had a fever.

[46]

Ms. Kaur testified that the child had 3 or 4 seizures, with the last one

being a year ago.

Mr. Doal said their child was a healthy child. Ms. Kaur was

critical of Mr. Doal for thinking that their child had no health problems. I note thatthe child has never required further hospitalization or treatment.

Ms. Kaur had

not told to Mr. Doal these additional seizures which she described.

No medical

records were filed in the trial. Further, Ms. Kaur stated in her affidavit in supportfor custody that the child has no health concerns, special medical, educational,mental health or development needs.

In her evidence regarding her trip to India

in the summer of 2015, she said the child was “healthy”.

[47]

On one occasion during the father’s access, the child was on some

medication which he administered as requested by Ms. Kaur.

On another

- 13 -

- 14 -

emergency for treatment.

[48]

There is really no evidence that the parties have seriously disputed any

issues concerning the child’s health. In my view, Mr. Doal has cooperated withMs. Kaur regarding health care decisions relating to the child.
Other Disputes in the Marriage

[49]

Ms. Kaur testified that when Mr. Doal got a better job at an income

commensurate with hers, he opened his own bank account. He then split all thehousehold and child expenses and paid half.

Mr. Doal denied opening such an

account and the Court was not provided any proof of such an account.

[50]

Nonetheless, Ms. Kaur does not allege any unfairness but simply

expressed her hurt feelings that they did not treat everything jointly.

[51]

Ms. Kaur testified that they argued a lot about money.

I note that Ms.

Kaur’s income dropped 40% in 2014, by $20,000, due to her employer havingless work available.

This was the same year that her dependant family members

joined them in August 2014.
this couple is not surprising.

Under these circumstances, the financial stress on

occasion when the child became ill on an access visit, Mr. Doal took him to

- 15 -

Although testifying to their frequent arguments in the marriage, Ms. Kaur

also said that it came as a surprise and shock to her when Mr. Doal left thehome. She called him repeatedly to ask him to return home.

[53]

Some physical altercations in 2012 were mentioned by each party.

Ms.

Kaur testified that she was pushed off the bed by Mr. Doal when she waspregnant.

Mr. Doal was not cross-examined on this point so I do not have his

evidence.

Mr. Doal described an incident when the baby was only ten days old.

Mr. Doal testified that Ms. Kaur bit and scratched him.

He attended the police

station. He did not want his wife charged, however, and had a discussion with aPunjabi speaking officer who later called Ms. Kaur. Ms. Kaur denies that she bitor scratched her husband.

The police report says there was a verbal

disagreement.
Litigation

[54]

This application was filed by Mr. Doal within three months of separation.

Neither party brought any interim motions, apart from Ms. Kaur seeking an orderfor the father to attend questioning. He said he did not wish to attend due to theexpense, and he hoped to resolve things short of court proceedings.

[55]

Mr. Doal did not seek overnight access in his application, recognizing that

the child was only two and a half years old and would have a strong attachment

[52]

- 16 -

He did plead that he would like gradual overnight access as the

child grew older.

[56]

I consider Mr. Doal’s gradual overnight access parenting plan to be a

reasonable approach.

[57]

Ms. Kaur cooperated with providing access opportunities without court

order.

It began with every second Saturday for 3 hours.

She increased the

access to 5 hours four months later and then to 8 hours two months later, againwithout court order.

[58]

Mr. Doal has been requesting overnight access through his counsel for

some time now. At the opening of trial, Ms. Kaur consented to overnight accesscommencing on a gradual basis.

By July 2017, this summer access will be

increased to two overnights on alternate weekends.

[59]

By the second day of trial, the parties had agreed on summer vacation

and holiday access such that there was a consent order, a copy of which isappended to this judgment.

They also agreed on life insurance and health

benefits provisions for a consent order.

[60]

The parties have agreed that the child will be raised in the Sikh religion,

which is incorporated into this Order, on consent.

to his mother.

- 17 -

In this litigation, generally the parties have shown themselves to be

reasonable and willing to make concessions to the other, demonstrating that thebest interests of the child are paramount.
Involvement of the Father in the Child’s Life

[62]

Ms. Kaur’s counsel argued at the opening of trial that Mr. Doal has not

played a major role in the child’s life either before or after the child’s life. I findthe evidence to be to the contrary.

[63]

Ms. Kaur’s evidence suggested that he did not want a child and that he

was not happy when the child was born.

Mr. Doal testified that he was happy

about the child. Ms. Kaur admitted that the father was present at the birth of thechild and they took the baby to temple together on the way home from thehospital.

Early photos of the father and baby son show the two of them cuddled

together, with father beaming.

I accept that the father was a loving parent from

the start.

[64]

For eleven months, it is admitted that Mr. Doal shared the childcare

duties with Ms. Kaur.

He testified to long hours that Ms. Kaur worked.

testified that she worked short hours.

She

[61]

- 18 -

Mr. Doal remembered her working 10-12 hours on Monday, Tuesday and

Wednesday, and then 4 hours on Thursday and Friday evenings.

This would

amount to 38-44 hours a week.

[66]

Ms. Kaur remembered that she worked 7-8 hours on Monday, Tuesday

and Wednesday, and then 3 1/2 hours on Thursday and Friday evenings. Thiswould be a total of 27-31 hours a week.

[67]

The extent to which Mr. Doal provided care was relevant, such that I

reviewed Ms. Kaur’s income over this period.

Her wage was $17-$18/hour.

In

2013, she earned $57,002 despite being off work for the beginning of the yearand then returning part time for three months. As her employer had less work forher in 2014, she only earned $35,392.

[68]

For 2013, I accept Mr. Doal’s evidence that Ms. Kaur worked the longer

hours he described and he cared for the child accordingly. For 2014, I acceptMs. Kaur’s evidence that she was home more and so Mr. Doal’s childcare dutieswere reduced.

[69]

Ms. Kaur, in cross-examination, was critical of the care which the father

provided over this time frame.

She was asked if she was happy with his care.

She said she was not. For example, she suggested that the child’s diaper would

[65]

- 19 -

now that she was home.

Ms. Kaur also said that she heard from the landlady

that the child was crying in the day and she worried that Mr. Doal was not feedingthe child. She also said he did not bath the child.

[70]

Mr. Doal’s evidence was that he bathed, changed and fed the child and

took him out in the stroller to the park.

[71]

Respectfully, I am unable to believe Ms. Kaur’s evidence on this point.

By all accounts, Ms. Kaur is a good mother. I do not accept that she would allowher child to be so neglected for almost a year by anyone who would not feed himor change him. No medical evidence was produced suggesting diaper rashes ormalnutrition.
Father’s Involvement Since Separation

[72]

Mr. Doal has not missed a single access visit since the parties arranged

things cooperatively.

He has had 59 visits as of the time of trial. Mr. Doal did

both pick up and drop off on every visit without incident.
called when he was expecting to be late.

He was on time or

be full when she got home from work and that Mr. Doal would tell her to change it

- 20 -

He had requested overnight access through his counsel but did not

litigate the matter.

As noted, the parties have worked out a gradual schedule for

the future overnights.

[74]

Photos and videos since separation show healthy activities of going to

the library, the playground, play centres, Indian festivals and dressing forHallowe’en.

Mr. Doal and the child rough-house with one another, brush their

teeth, play with stickers, watch cartoons and do painting and gardening.

[75]

Mr. Doal said he took some parenting classes as well.

[76]

Mr. Doal and Ms. Kaur communicated by text message to facilitate

access.

The messages were generally polite back-and-forth communications.

They demonstrate compromises made regarding the timing of the access visits,and further demonstrate the father’s cooperation and acquiescence when themother denied various requests made by him.

[77]

Mr. Doal had no criticism of the care that Ms. Kaur was providing to their

son except that he was upset when he was not consulted regarding the child’sschool, described below.

[78]

When the child was three and a half years old, Ms. Kaur enrolled him in a

school which provided both Punjabi spoken subjects and Sikh education.

When

[73]

- 21 -

the school.

He sought to speak with the teachers and see how his son was

performing.

The school refused as they had a letter that only the boy’s mother

and uncle could pick him up from school.

[79]

On consent of the parties, I order that the father will be named as

emergency contact for the child on education and health-related forms, and thatMr. Doal may contact any educators or service providers to obtain informationregarding his son.

[80]

As noted, the father agreed that the child would be raised in the Sikh

faith. He has also consented to share the additional section 7 cost of the school.

[81]

It was particularly in the area of education that Mr. Doal expressed that

he wanted to be involved in decision-making for the child. He felt education wasimportant and would impact the child’s future.
Balance of Power

[82]

Ms. Kaur’s counsel argued Mr. Doal was a controlling person such that

joint custody would be unworkable.

[83]

Ms. Kaur testified that when her mother-in-law arrived to help with the

baby, that Mr. Doal “forced” her back to work.

However, in cross-examination

it came to Mr. Doal’s attention that the boy was at this school, Mr. Doal attended

- 22 -

reach a financial threshold in order to sponsor her parents to Canada.

I am

satisfied that she had her own motivation to return promptly to work and was not
“forced” to do so by Mr. Doal.

[84]

Her counsel argued that it was a measure of Mr. Doal’s controlling nature

that he had not paid the support owed for the first six months after separation. Attrial Mr. Doal acknowledged that he owed it, but asked that the court not order itbe paid as it was financially difficult for him.

[85]

Although I consider it improper for him to have left the home and not

immediately provide support for the child’s needs, particularly as he sought legalcounsel upon separation, I do not equate it to his assertion of control over Ms.Kaur.

[86]

Mr. Doal began to pay support without court order six months after

separation. There is no claim that he ever missed a payment or was late.

[87]

It was determined that Mr. Doal underpaid support in 2015 by $309; in

2016 by $612 and in 2017 by $48.

These were Guideline calculations on his

Line 150 income levels, to which he agreed he owed and consented to a courtorder to pay it.

she agreed that she did not go on full maternity leave as she was attempting to

- 23 -

Although Mr. Doal could have agreed to resolve this issue long before

trial, as his line 150 income and the Child Support Guidelines were known to him,the unpaid amounts are modest and do not equate to him lording control overMs. Kaur.

[89]

In support of the argument that Mr. Doal was a controlling person,

several answers were read into the record from his questioning.
asked why he wanted joint custody.
right.”

Mr. Doal was

His answer was “….because I—the father,

He was not asked to expand on this answer but was asked the following

questions:
“You were born in India?”
“India is a patriarchal society”
“Just because you’re a man you believe you have more rights, right?”

[90]

Mr. Doal responded “Yes” to each of the above questions.

[91]

Counsel for Ms. Kaur urged me to conclude from this exchange that it is

evident that Mr. Doal will impose his will on Ms. Kaur.

[92]

Mr. Doal did not have the benefit of a Punjabi interpreter during

questioning.

He stated at trial, through an interpreter, that he felt he did not

[88]

- 24 -

meaning of the word ‘patriarchal.’

[93]

He testified that he had many women students in his college class; his

sister is an English teacher in India; and he does not believe men are superior towomen. He was raised by parents who made joint decisions.

He does not think

women are less intelligent than men and he pointed out that he retained awoman lawyer to represent him in this application.

[94]

The evidence since separation shows that Ms.

Kaur has largely

controlled matters concerning the child and that Mr. Doal has co-operated. I amnot persuaded that he has been shown to be so forceful that he will overbear Ms.Kaur’s parenting will.

I see no evidence that he will seek to make decisions just

to bully Ms. Kaur, nor is there evidence that he will put his own interests ahead ofthe child’s.

[95]

Ms. Kaur brought a criminal legal proceeding India against Mr. Doal and

his parents regarding the failure of the marriage. I was not provided with the finalorder in this proceeding but understand from the parties that it means that hisparents are unable to travel to Canada to visit and Mr. Doal is unable to travel inIndia without potential arrest. Mr. Doal said the decision is under appeal. There

express himself properly at the questioning and that he did not then know the

- 25 -

interfered with the parties’ communication with one another.

[96]

Mr. Doal made one unscheduled visit to Ms. Kaur’s home to check who

was minding the child when he discovered that Ms. Kaur had gone to India forseveral weeks at that time but nothing arose from his visit.
Law on Sole Custody vs. Joint Custody

[97]

The law on sole custody versus joint custody was recently articulated by
B.

Sole Custody vs. Joint Custody

[...]

[28]

The Ontario Court of Appeal’s approach to joint custody has evolved over

the years. In Kruger, Supra., and Baker v. Baker the court held that joint custody isan exceptional remedy that should only be granted in circumstances where theparties demonstrate co-operation and appropriate communication, and are willing totry a joint custodial arrangement. Since that time, the court has dropped therequirement of consent to a joint custody order, but has maintained that in order togrant joint custody, there must be some evidence before the court that despite theirdifferences, the parties are able to communicate effectively with each other. Therationale for this principle is that the best interests of the child will not be advanced if

was no evidence before me that the child was told of this litigation or that it has

- 26 -

the parties are unable to make important decisions regarding the child under a joint

[29]

While some measure of communication and cooperation between the

parties is necessary to support a joint custody order, the court is not required to applya standard of perfection in assessing the parents’ ability to work together. As Quinn,J. remarked in Brook v. Brook, , “the cooperation needed is workable, not blissful;adequate, not perfect.” A mere statement by one party that there is an inability tocommunicate will not be sufficient to preclude a joint custody order. The court mustcarefully consider the parties’ past and current parenting relationship and reach itsown conclusions respecting the parties’ ability to communicate, rather than simplyrelying on allegations of conflict by one or both of the parties. Furthermore, theexistence of conflict and strife between the parties from time to time, and at the timeof trial, will not necessarily preclude the court from making an order for jointcustody. The question to be determined is whether the nature, extent and frequencyof the conflict between the parties are such that the conflict is impacting or likely toimpact on the well-being of the child. If the evidence indicates that the parties havebeen able to shelter the child from the conflict reasonably well and put the child’sinterests ahead of their own when necessary, an order for joint custody may beappropriate (Ladisa, Ibid.). The question for the court to determine is “whether areasonable measure of communication and cooperation is in place, and is achievablein the future, so that the best interests of the child can be ensured on an ongoingbasis”.

[30]

Where an objective review of the historical and more recent evidence

clearly indicates that there has never been an ability to cooperate or communicateeffectively, or that one or both of the parties is/are unable to put the needs of the childbefore their own, joint custody is not an appropriate order. In these circumstances,hoping that communication between the parties will improve once the litigation is overdoes not provide a sufficient basis for making an order of joint custody.

[31]

In analyzing the ability of the parties to communicate, the court must delve

below the surface and consider the source of the conflict. The Ontario Court of

custody regime.

- 27 -

Appeal has clearly stated that one parent cannot create conflict and problems with thethe other parent, or by any other means and then claim sole custody on the basis oflack of cooperation and communication.

[32]

There has been an increasing willingness in recent years to order joint

custody rather than sole custody where necessary in order to preserve the balance ofpower between the parties, particularly in cases where both parties are caring andcompetent parents but one party has been primarily responsible for the conflictbetween the parties.

[33]

Although the foregoing comments outline the various factors and

considerations which the courts have taken into consideration in deciding betweensole and joint custody, the analysis must at all times remain firmly grounded in thebest interests of the child before the court. While both parents may be attentive andloving, a joint custody order may not coincide with the child’s best interests. AsPazaratz, J. stated in Izyuk v. Bilousov, at para. 504, “[I]n the wrong familycircumstances, a joint custody order can perpetuate hostilities, indecision, and powerstruggles. Children- particularly children already exposed to the upset of familybreakdown- look to their parents for love, guidance, stability, protection, andconsistency. They need to have confidence that adult decisions will be made quickly,properly and uneventfully.”[References Removed]

[98]

In the context of this case, I am struck by the similarity of the evidence to

other parent by engaging in unreasonable conduct, impeding access, marginalizing

- 28 -

The trial judge was in the best position to determine the importance of this incident andthose incidents is summarized in this paragraph:
Small matters, idiosyncrasies, and immature conduct, at trial, [were] made tolook large and destructive but after all the evidence was completed thepicture of this couple [is that they are] relatively balanced ... emotionally andto my mind, quite capable of working this matter through on a joint custodywith equally shared access.

[99]

For reasons that follow, I similarly find the parties in this case to be

relatively balanced, reasonable, and capable of jointly making decisions that arein the best interests of their child.
Analysis on Custody

[100]

Ms. Kaur described Mr. Doal being controlling, argumentative and

difficult, but I was not persuaded that the parties have been unable work thingsout between them, keeping the child’s needs at the forefront.

[101]

These parties, overall, have shown maturity and care in dealing with their

young son since separation.

They have sheltered the child from conflict. They

have communicated politely with one another. When Ms. Kaur registered thechild for school, Mr. Doal made no objections but made inquiries about theschool in his concern for the child.

They each have made multiple concessions

to one another, just as any parents who remain married would have to

the several other incidents of bad behaviour alleged by both parties. His conclusion on

compromise when making parenting decisions.

They have avoided reliance on

the courts to make such decisions for them.

They have been reasonable with

one another.

[102]

Mr. Doal has demonstrated interest in and care for his son since the

boy’s infancy.

He has demonstrated that he is cooperative and has not caused

further hostilities in the relationship.

He seeks to have an impact on his son’s

future. I see the child can benefit from input in major decisions from his father.

[103]

Although the court approaches an order of joint custody in the face of

perceived conflict cautiously, this is a case where it is an appropriate order.
ORDERS PURSUANT TO MY JUDGMENT

[104]

Accordingly, I order,

[105]

Mr. Doal to pay past childcare expenses of $4,800.This amount shall be

paid in monthly installments of $100 commencing June 1, 2017.

[106]

The parties shall each pay 50% of special and extraordinary expenses

relating to the child, within 30 days of being provided proof thereof.

[107]

Each parent is to advise the other in writing what extracurricular activity

the child is enrolled in with particulars of dates and times, 7 days before anyactivity is to start.

- 29 -

- 30 -

If there is no agreement as to the special and extraordinary expenses in

relation to the child, either party may bring a motion on notice to the other partyto address the issue.

[109]

Mr. Doal is to pay the outstanding child support of $2,353. This shall be

paid in monthly installments of $50, commencing June 1, 2017.

[110]

Mr. Doal may not travel with the child outside of Canada.

This order is

without prejudice to him applying to vary this order upon demonstrating to thecourt that he is not liable to arrest in India.

[111]

Mr. Doal and Ms. Kaur are to have joint custody of the child.

Consent Orders

[112]

The parties may phone the child when the child is in the care of the other

parent for up to 5 minutes, between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m.

[113]

Neither party shall make any disparaging remarks against the other

parent or his/her relatives in the presence of the child or within hearing distanceof the child.

[108]

- 31 -

If there is any access missed by reason of the child travelling with Ms.

Kaur pursuant to paragraph 1 of my order of April 5, 2017, access shall be madeup either before or after the trip.

[115]

As agreed to by the parties, the child will be raised in the Sikh religion.

[116]

Ms. Kaur is to name Mr. Doal as emergency contact for the school and

any service providers. Mr. Doal is permitted to obtain information from the schooland service providers regarding the child at any time.

[117]

In accordance with Appendix A attached, my order of April 5, 2017 made

on consent is included in this judgment.
COSTS

[118]

If the parties are unable to resolve the matter of costs, I order Mr. Doal

to serve and file written submissions of three pages or less, plus any costoutlines, offers to settle and case law, within 14 days. Thereafter, Ms. Kaur may

provide similar written submissions within 14 days. If required, Mr. Doal maysubmit one page reply submissions plus attachments within 7 days thereafter.

[114]

- 32 -

Released:

May 24, 2017

___________________________
M. J. Donohue, J

- 33 -

APPENDIX A: FINAL ORDER DATED APRIL 5, 2017

- 34 -

APPENDIX A: FINAL ORDER DATED APRIL 5, 2017

- 35 -

APPENDIX A: FINAL ORDER DATED APRIL 5, 2017

- 36 -

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B E T W E E N:
Gurpreet Singh DoalApplicant
- and -

Bajwinder KaurRespondent

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

M. J. Donohue, J

Released:

May 24, 2017

CITATION: Daol v Kaur, 2017 ONSC 3182
COURT FILE NO.: FS-14-4958-00
DATE: 20170524

