SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO
RE:

LARISSA LOUISE EASSON, ApplicantAND
DR. FRIEDRICH RUDOLF BLASE, Respondent

BEFORE:

MESBUR J.

COUNSEL: Derek Ground, for the applicant, for this motion onlyThe respondent in personHEARD:

April 20, 2017
ENDORSEMENT

Introduction:

[1]
The respondent father has launched a motion to change. In it, hemoves, for the second time in 5 years, to change the final order of Klowak J of May 14,2012. That order was made on consent, and set out a comprehensive scheme forparenting the parties’ two sons, and for child support, including s.7 expenses. On thismotion before me, the applicant mother moves to strike the father’s current motion tochange on the basis he is in significant breach of prior orders, particularly costs orders.
Alternatively, and additionally, she moves to strike on the basis this current motion tochange is frivolous and vexatious and an abuse of the court’s process. She seekssummary judgment dismissing the motion to change as a result. In the furtheralternative, the mother seeks to have the father declared a vexatious litigant. In eachof these instances she asks that the father be prohibited from bringing further motionswithout first obtaining leave from the court. Last, the mother asks that the father berequired to provide security for costs as a precondition to proceeding further in thiscourt.

[2]
Although the father purported to have a cross-motion heard at the same time asthe mother’s motion, the issues in it had neither been conferenced, nor had any cross-

CITATION: Easson v. Blase, 2017 ONSC 2982
COURT FILE NO.: FS-10-360434-0004
DATE: 20170515

-2-

[3]
Although the mother also framed her motion as a motion for summary judgment,that issue (in the sense contemplated by the rule 1) was not fully argued on theevidence. Instead, the mother’s argument focused on the court’s ability to strike, stayor dismiss a claim for failure to obey an order or orders, and to strike documents thatare inflammatory, a waste of time, a nuisance or an abuse of the court’s process. 2

[4]
In order to understand the mother’s motion to strike, it is critical to put thefather’s motion to change in context, and to outline in some detail the tortured historyof this case.
The history of the parties and their litigation:

[5]
The parties were married in the fall of 2003. Their first child Nikolas was bornabout a month after the parties married. The parties “officially” separated on May 15,2009. Their second son Julian was born two months later, on July 20, 2009.

[6]
The parties have been in virtually constant conflict since their separation, and inconstant litigation about their children since June of 2010 when the mother commencedan application to secure child support. They were headed toward a lengthy trial almostthree years to the day from their separation. They were able to avoid a trial byconsenting to a comprehensive and detailed parenting regime. That regime wasincorporated into a consent final order of Klowak J, dated May 14, 2012.

[7]
The final order deals with decision making and consultation. It also includesprovisions for mediation with Dr. Irwin Butkowsky.
If the parents cannot come to anagreement, the mother has final decision making authority.

[8]
In May of 2014, or two years after the final order, the father commenced amotion to change. His motion resulted in a 12-day trial before McWatt J over April,June and July 2015. According to the trial decision, father was seeking the following: 3
a)

1

Increased time sharing, regarding the two children of the marriage,such that the children reside with each parent on an alternate weekbasis with exchanges to take place on Monday morning at school;

Rule 16 of the Family Law Rules permits the court to grant summary judgment in cases where there is no genuineissue requiring a trial of a claim or defence. In determining whether there is a genuine issue for trial, the court myweigh the evidence, evaluate credibility of a deponent or draw any reasonable inference from the evidence.
2
Rules 1(8), 1(8.1) and 1(8.2) of the Family Law Rules3
Paragraph 4 of Reasons for Judgment in Easson v Blase, 2015 ONSC 5170

motion been properly scheduled. Accordingly, I declined to hear it, and dealt only withthe mother’s motion to strike.

b)

The parent residing with the children at the relevant time to makedaily decisions affecting their welfare;

c)

Summer vacations to be divided equally with the father to have thefirst half and the mother the 2nd half or, alternatively, for thesummer to be divided into quarters with one parent to have the 1stand 3rd quarter and the other the 2nd and 4th quarter;

d)

The residential and vacation schedule to take precedence over anycivic and/or statutory holidays;

e)

Parallel parenting such that the order provide the parties have jointcustody with decision making to be divided between them with oneparent to have final decision making regarding nanny/child care,extra-curricular activities and religion; and, the other to have finaldecision making regarding education and health; or, in the furtheralternative, that neither parent to have final decision makingregarding the children’s schooling and the issue of schools to bedetermined by agreement of the parties or by the Court, or, if theparties agree, by Dr. Butkowsky;

f)

It is also possible that decision making could be divided in someother manner – what is important is that neither party haveabsolute control;

g)

An order that Julian, who is to enter grade 1 in September, 2015,change schools from Ecole Charles Sauriol to Ecole Pierre ElliotTrudeau; and

h)

Costs, including costs of expediting transcripts.

[9]
At the trial the father did not argue (f) above, nor particularize what he meant byit. As for (e), his position at trial was that he should be the decision maker regardingeducation and health. On the second day of the trial, the trial judge asked the m otherif she was prepared to provide more parenting time for the father. The mother wasagreeable, and the parties consented to an order to that effect. As a result of theirconsent, the children now reside with the father on alternate weeks from Wednesdaymorning from the start of school through Monday mornings until the start of the schoolday. If Monday is a holiday, then the boys remain with the father until the Tuesdayuntil school begins.

[10]
That consent change was the only change made to the final order. OnSeptember 18, 2015 McWatt J released her reasons for judgment. She dismissed thefather’s motion to change in its entirety. In doing so, she made significant findings of

-3-

fact. At paragraph 86, McWatt J found the children have flourished in their mother’sstable and continuous care. At paragraph 87 she determined the father would use thenew decision-making power he had asked for to harm the children’s relationship withtheir mother.

[11]

At paragraph 89 the trial judge concluded:
I cannot and will not imagine what material change would justify changingthe Final Order. The best interests of these children are already beingserved. The parallel parenting regime suggested by the father would serveonly to undermine the children’s stability in the context of their parents’
unstable relationship.

[12]
After receiving costs submissions following the trial, McWatt J ordered thefather to pay the mother’s costs, fixed at $78,675, all inclusive. The costs order isdated November 20, 2015. In her costs endorsement, the trial judge described themotion to change before her as “really an attempt to appeal” the original consent order.

[13]
Father did not pay the costs. Instead, he immediately launched an appealof the judgment, and sought leave to appeal the costs decision as well. The Court ofAppeal described the appeal as arising “Out of a high-conflict dispute between parentsregarding the residential schedule and parenting of their two children, now 12 and 7
years old.”4 The court went on to quote the trial judge’s comment that the father
“holds unbridled hostility towards” the mother and the children have flourished in themother’s stable and continuous care. The Court of Appeal also quoted paragraph 89 ofthe trial judge’s reasons, which I have set out above.

[14]
The Court of Appeal dismissed the father’s appeal on July 29, 2016. Theydenied the mother’s motion to admit fresh evidence on the appeal. On September 29,2016 the Court of Appeal denied costs of the appeal to either party.

[15]
The very next day, father executed all the necessary documents for a newmotion to change.
Father’s motion to change, change information form and financialstatement are all dated September 30, 2016. The motion to change itself was issuedon October 7, 2017. The motion to change, Change information form, affidavit, andconference notice were all served on October 8.

[16]

In his current change information form father seeks the following:
a)

4

The children to spend alternate weeks with each parent;

Easson v. Blase, 2016 ONCA 604

-4-

b)

Summer to be divided in half, with the children spending the first half withfather, and the second half with mother;

c)

Terminating his child support obligation effective July 31, 2016;

d)

Amending paragraphs 47, 48, 50 and 55 of the final consent order so that:

e)

5

i)

The shared expense for the nanny is reduced to a total of
$650/month as of September 2013 5 until and including January2016;

ii)

As of February 2015 6 and for as long in the future as child care isprovided through Dianne Baldwin there shall be no sharing ofextraordinary expenses for the nanny;

iii)

Mother shall reimburse Father for all costs arising from anyenforcement measures taken by the Family Responsibility Officesince September 20137;

iv)

The parents shall agree on the reconciliation of Section 7 expensesfor the years 2013, 2014 8 and 2015 within 6 weeks after the date ofthe decision

v)

Since the parents have almost equal taxable income in 2015 (ca.
$175,000), effective August 1, 2016 they shall not pay each otherchild support and pay 50% each of the extraordinary expenses

To change the provisions for decision making, nanny, Section 7 expenses,passports and travels consent as follows:
i)

Paragraph 3 of the Order of Klowak J, dated May 14, 2012: Theparents shall jointly appoint a successor to Dr. Butkowsky. Ifmediation does not produce a resolution, mother shall have final –
decision making authority over health care and extra-curricularactivities.

ii)

Paragraph 39 of the Order of Klowak J, dated May 14, 2012: themother shall make the Canadian passports of both children as wellas a travel consent available to the father for any travel at least 7
days prior to date of travel. The mother shall cooperate in the

It is noteworthy this date predates the trial in the first motion to change.
This date also predates the trial in the first motion to change.
7
This dates also predates the trial in the first motion to change.
8
2013 and 2014 also predate the trial in the first motion to change.
6

-5-

-6-

[17]
Mother delivered her response to the motion to change on November 10,2016. In it, she asks for the motion to change to be dismissed in its entirety and tostrike or dismiss the motion to change because of the father’s failure to comply withnumerous orders of this court and the Court of Appeal. She also asks the court to setout a schedule for procedural steps to be taken and the date for a motion to resolve thefinancial review regarding child support and s.7 expenses as provided in section 56 ofthe Klowak J final order.

[18]
The mother’s response points out that at the date of her response,namely November 9, 2016 and certainly when the father commenced this currentmotion to change, he was in breach of the following orders:
a)

The costs order of McWatt J dated November 20, 2015, in the amount of
$78,675, plus interest;

b)

The Order of Hood J of May 26, 2016 awarding costs to the mother of
$800;

c)

The order of MacFarland JA of July 13, 2016 awarding costs to the motherof $1,000;

d)

The order of Hood J of August 16, 2016 awarding costs to the mother of
$1,500;

e)

The order of Klowak J dated May 14, 2012 requiring that father shallcontinue to pay child support until the order has been varied by furtherorder. No such further order has been issued and the father’s arrearsamount to $7,600.

[19]
On November 21, 2016 mother served this motion to strike. Her affidavitin support of the motion is sworn November 20, 2016. The motion was madereturnable February 7, 2017. The father therefore had significant notice of the motionto strike. He did not respond to it until January 30, 2017. I have no idea why he wouldhave taken over two months to do so. His response, however, bears comment.

[20]
Father’s affidavit in response to this motion to change comprises 561
paragraphs (not counting the 9 pages of what he describes as “relief sought”), over 104
pages. Appended to the 104-page affidavit are 145 exhibits. The affidavit and itsexhibits fill four complete volumes of the continuing record, namely volumes 2, 3, 4 and5.

issuance of new German passports for both children and recognizesthat Julian’s last name according to German law is “Blase” only.

[21]
Needless to say, the mother was in no position to reply to this “dump” ofmaterial before the long-scheduled motion date. Instead of the motion, the courtconvened a case conference before Frank J on February 10, 2017. On that date, FrankJ rescheduled the motion to be heard as a long motion on April 20, 2017. She set atimetable for delivery of facta as well as time limits for argument. She also required thefather to comply with the order of the DRO, and provide banking and credit cardstatements within two weeks. Father was also ordered to provide particulars of thedisposition of the proceeds of the Strachan Ave. property within 4 weeks. Father didneither until the week before the motion to strike was argued before me.

[22]

[23]

Frank J’s order also went on to provide, on consent:
a)

The parties shall retain a parenting co-ordinator to replace Dr.Butkowsky. The applicant [sic] has proposed two co-ordinators.
The applicant shall respond to that proposal within 10 days. If shedoes not approve either, she will submit a 3 rd name and the partieswill ask Dr. Butkowsky to choose the co-ordinator from amongstthose 3 names. The parties will approach Dr. Butkowsky by emailwithin 15 days;

b)

The financial issues, i.e. the amount of support and s.7s to be paidby the respondent will be mediated by the parenting co-ordinator.
Frank J concluded her endorsement as follows:

Mr. Blase has been reminded of his obligation to comply with the cost orderof McWatt J dated November 20, 2015. He has paid nothing towards thatorder. He ought not to be able to resort to the courts in the manner inwhich he has while at the same time disregarding its orders.

[24]
On the return of the motion to strike, on April 20, 2017, the father hadfinally and in a piecemeal fashion complied with his disclosure obligations, but not untilthe week before the motion. The father also finally paid the costs orders apart from thecosts of the trial. Notwithstanding Frank J’s endorsement two months earlier, fatherwas still in default of the trial costs order of over $78,000 when mother’s counselargued the motion to strike.

[25]
When father began his argument in response to the motion to strike, I
asked him to explain his default. He suddenly reached into his pocket and pulled outwhat he described as a certified cheque for the “full” amount of the trial costs of
$78,675, but without accrued interest. With somewhat of a flourish and a smirk hepassed the cheque across the courtroom to mother’s counsel. I have no idea whetherhe would have delivered the cheque had I not raised the issue. Father had no

-7-

reasonable explanation for why he had failed to deliver the cheque before the motionwas argued, or why he had failed to include accrued interest. The judgment bearsinterest at 2% from September 18, 2015. The judgment directed the costs be paidwithin 6 months. Obviously, they were not. As I calculate it, accrued interest to April20, 2016 is $2,353.61. That amount is still owing and still remains unpaid.

[26]
It is against this historical background that I now turn to the mother’smotion to strike.
Discussion:

[27]
The mother describes the father’s current motion to change, quiteaccurately, as seeking “to vary the Order of Justice Klowak dated May 14, 2012 (“FinalOrder”) to increase the amount of time the children are resident with him, to providehim with increased decision-making authority, and to terminate retrospectively hisfinancial obligations regarding childcare costs.”9

[28]
The mother goes on to note that “the father also seeks changes to hisfinancial obligations (including a claim for support against the mother).” 10 She asks thecourt to strike this request for relief since “the father has yet to make full financialdisclosure and the financial review contemplated by the Final Order has not beencompleted. The father also asks for scheduling process changes. This request shouldbe struck as the parties are in the process of appointing a new parenting coordinator toassist with scheduling.”11

[29]
As the mother points out, the Final Order was issued on consent, andgoverns residential matters as well as child support, including s.7 expenses, includingchild care/nanny costs. The highlights of the Final Order are the following:

9

a)

The mother has final decision-making authority over importantdecisions (after consulting and conferring and if needed, attemptedmediation, with the father);

b)

The children reside primarily with the mother. There was a processfor gradually extending the time with father pursuant to mediationwith Doctor Butkowsky. He, however, was not mandated tomediate or consider a new parenting regime. A new parentingregime could only be determined by a court if there were a materialchange in circumstances.

Mother’s Revised Factum, paragraph 2
Ibid, paragraph 4
11
Ibid.
10

-8-

c)

Father is to pay monthly child support of $1,992 plus nanny costsof $1,338.74;

d)

Financial arrangements were to be reviewed in July 2016. Father,however, was to continue to pay the child support and nanny costsabove until there is a further agreement or court order, and subjectto adjustment as needed after August 1, 2016;

[30]
The mother advances a number of arguments to support her ultimateposition that the father’s current motion to change should be struck, stayed ordismissed.

[31]
First, mother says the motion to change should be struck on the basis offather’s breach of prior orders. It is noteworthy that father was in breach of numerousorders when he began his current motion to change. Although he finally paid the faceamount of the costs order from the first motion to change, the amount had beenoutstanding nearly a year and a half. Father has still failed to pay the outstandinginterest owing on the trial costs.

[32]
Second, mother says the motion to change should be struck as being anabuse of the court’s process, a waste of time, or frivolous and vexatious on its face.

[33]
Third, mother argues not only is this proceeding vexatious on its face, butfather himself should be declared a vexatious litigant, the proceeding struck, and heshould be prohibited from commencing any further proceedings without first obtainingleave of the court.

[34]
Last, mother takes the position even if the motion to change is not struck,father should be required to post significant security for costs as a precondition toproceeding further. She suggests the figure of $70,000 would be appropriate, given thelength of the prior trial before McWatt J, and the ultimate costs disposition against thefather as a result.

[35]

I will address each of the mother’s arguments in turn.

Breach of prior ordersRule 1(8) of the Family Law Rules provides:

[36]

If a person fails to obey an order in a case or a related case, the courtmay deal with the failure by making any order that it considers necessaryfor a just determination of the matter, including,a)

An order for costs;

-9-

b)

An order dismissing a claim;

c)

An order striking out any application, answer, notice of motion,motion to change, response to motion to change, financialstatement, affidavit, or any other document filed by a party;

d)

An order that all or part of a document that was required to beprovided but was not, may not be used in the case;

e)

If the failure to obey was by a party, an order that the party is notentitled to any further order from the court unless the court ordersotherwise;

f)

An order postponing the trial or any other step in the case; and

g)

On motion, a contempt order.

[37]
Striking a claim is a serious remedy. It should only be used in the clearestof cases. Here, when father began the current motion to change he was in breach ofall the outstanding costs orders against him, both from this court and the Court ofAppeal. He was in breach of his child support obligations when he stopped makingregular child support payments in March of 2015. Father came into compliance onlywhen the FRO began enforcement, and he had to discharge a lien in their favour whenhe sold his home. At that time, he owed more than $30,000 in unpaid child support.
Mother also points out the father has never complied with his annual financial disclosureobligations under the original order.

[38]
Father has complied with court ordered obligations slowly, grudgingly andonly when compelled to do so. As I have said, when argument began on this verymotion, father still had not paid the costs order from the previous motion to change.
The costs had been outstanding since November of 2015. Even when he magicallyproduced a certified cheque to pay the costs, the cheque did not include accruedinterest.

[39]
Thus, the father remains in breach of his obligations under a court order.
He should not be permitted to proceed further until all his obligations have been paid infull.

[40]
Had the father not paid at least the face amount of the costs, albeit aslate in the day as he could, I would have had little hesitation in striking or staying hismotion to change on that basis. Since the interest owing is just under $2,500, and allother costs orders have finally been paid, I am not prepared to strike the motion tochange, but will stay it pending father’s payment of the interest. He shall pay theoutstanding interest of $2,353.61 within 30 days. During this 30-day period, father is

- 10 -

prohibited from taking any further steps in the motion to change, or bringing anymotions or proceedings at all. If father does not pay the interest within 30 days, thenthis motion to change shall be permanently stayed, and father shall be prohibited fromtaking any further steps in the motion to change, or bring any motions of any nature orkind without first obtaining leave of this court to do so.

Abuse of process/vexatious proceedings

[41]
Mother also argues father’s motion to change can and should bedismissed as an abuse of the court’s process, or as a vexatious proceeding. As themother points out in her factum, the court has jurisdiction to sanction vexatious andabusive proceedings under the Family Law Rules, the Courts of Justice Act, and thecourt’s inherent jurisdiction to control its own processes.

[42]
Rule 1(8), which I have set out above, lists methods by which a litigantcan be sanctioned for non-compliance with court orders. Rule 14(21) permits the courtto prohibit a party from bringing further motions without leave in cases where the partyhas tried to delay the case, add to its costs, or to abuse the court’s process by makingnumerous motions without merit.

[43]
Rule 16 deals with motions for summary judgment, while section 140 ofthe Courts of Justice Act permits the court to stay a proceeding or prohibit furtherproceedings where the court is satisfied that a person has persistently and withoutreasonable grounds instituted vexatious proceedings in any court.
A leading case on vexatious proceedings is Lang Michener Lash Johnstonv. Fabian . In it, the court sets out a number of identifying signs of a vexatiousproceeding. These include:

[44]

12

(a) Bringing one or more actions to determine an issue which has already beendetermined;
(b) Finding it obvious the action cannot succeed, or would lead to no possible good,or if no person could reasonably expect to obtain relief;
(c) Bringing a proceeding for an improper purpose, such as harassment andoppression of others by multifarious proceedings brought for purposes other thanasserting legitimate rights.
(d) “rolling forward” grounds and issues into subsequent actions, repeated andsupplemented and often adding as defendants lawyers who acted for or againstthe litigant in earlier proceedings;12

[1987] O.J. No. 355 (H.C.)

- 11 -

- 12 (e) Failing to pay costs of unsuccessful proceedings

[45]
The principles set out in Lang Michener have been followed and adoptedin family law cases.13 In Ballentine, in particular, the Court of Appeal held that theapplication of s. 140 of the Courts of Justice Act is particularly important in family lawmatters, given the availability of variation orders for support and custody. 14 The Courtof Appeal went on to note with approval the decision of Polowin J in Beattie vLadouceur15 and said “without some mechanism to prevent abuse, a party could bringan endless stream of variation applications, with a new one launched as soon as thelast one has been denied.”16 The question here is whether there is the kind of abusethat requires the court to intervene.

[46]
Put another way, do the father’s current motion to change and how hehas conducted himself in it meet the fairly high threshold of being a vexatiousproceeding or an abuse of the court’s process. In my view, while they comes close,they fall just short of being an abuse of process or a vexatious proceeding.

[47]
Because of the peculiar nature of family law proceedings whichcontemplate changing final orders if there has been a material change in circumstances,one cannot automatically conclude the current motion to change is an attempt to relitigate an issue that has already been determined. That being said, the court must alsobe mindful of the comments of the Court of Appeal in Ballentine, set out above.

[48]
The father’s current motion to change on its face seeks much of the samerelief as he unsuccessfully sought on the first motion to change and in his appeal ofthat decision. He has certainly “rolled forward” many of the same grounds. There may,however, be changes in circumstances that could conceivably result in a change to theinitial order. I cannot yet determine the motion to change is certain to fail in itsentirety.

[49]
As to whether the motion to change is brought for an improper purpose,or with a view to harassing the mother, again, father’s behavior comes close, but hasnot quite reached the necessary threshold set out in the case law. The 4 volumeaffidavit he filed, ostensibly in response to the motion to strike, is vexing and harassingin its sheer volume and the timing of its delivery. In fact, the father’s actual responseto this motion does not begin until paragraph 465 of the affidavit. That being said, I amnot persuaded father’s sole purpose is to harass the mother, although I have no doubt13
Ibid at paragraph 39
1516
Ballentine, note 9 above, at paragraph 39
14

(f) Persistently taking unsuccessful appeals from judicial decisions.

- 13 -

[50]
It is true the father has been in breach of prior orders, particularly costsorders. He has finally paid them all, with the exception of the interest owing on thetrial costs order. I can, and will, deal with that default in a fashion that falls short ofdeclaring this proceeding vexatious or an abuse of the court’s process.

[51]
If, however, the father persists in his current behaviour of complying withcourt orders only at the last moment, “dumping” inordinate amounts of material on themother late in the day, and essentially recycling the same arguments, he may yet havethis motion to change declared an abuse of process. While I dismiss this aspects of themother’s motion, I do so without prejudice to her renewing it at a later date if thefather’s behavior continues.

Vexatious litigant

[52]
The mother relies on section 140 of the Courts of Justice Act in askingthat father be declared a vexatious litigant. Section 140 permits the court to prohibit aperson from instituting any further proceedings if the court is persuaded that theperson has “persistently and without reasonable ground” instituted vexatiousproceedings in any court, or conducted a proceeding in a vexatious manner. Section140(5) provides that nothing in the section limits the authority of a court to stay ordismiss a proceeding as an abuse of process or on any other ground.

[53]

Similarly, rule 14(21) of the Family Law Rules says:
If a party tries to delay the case or add to its costs or in any other wayto abuse the court’s process by making numerous motions without merit,the court may order the party not to make any other motions in the casewithout the court’s permission.

[54]
In deciding whether a litigant is vexatious, the court must look at thewhole history of the matter, and not just whether there was originally a good cause ofaction.

[55]
Here, father failed completely on his first motion to change. His appeal ofthe dismissal of that motion to change was also dismissed. The fact father immediatelylaunched this current motion to change, advancing essentially the same grounds as heargued on the first motion to change is an indicator that he may be a vexatious litigant.

[56]
Father’s response to this motion to strike is also an indicator of his addingto costs and abusing the court’s process. A four-volume affidavit of more than 104

it is an underlying motivation to him, particularly given the trial judge’s factual findingconcerning the “unbridled hostility” the father bears toward the mother. Nothing in hiscurrent motion to change suggests any abatement of that hostility.

pages, with 145 exhibits added to the 104 pages is neither responsive to this mo tion,nor proportionate in all the circumstances. The court must control its own process.
Here, the provisions of rules 2(1) and 2(2) of the Family Law Rules are critical. Theysay:
2(2) Primary Objective – The primary objective of these rules is to enablethe court to deal with cases justly.
2(3) Dealing with Cases Justly – Dealing with a case justly includes,a)

Ensuring that the procedure is fair to all parties;

b)

Saving expense and time;

c)

Dealing with the case in ways that are appropriate to its importance andcomplexity; and

d)

Giving appropriate court resources to the case while taking account of theneed to give resources to other cases.

[57]
Here, father has already had a 12-day trial of his first motion to change.
He lost. He immediately appealed that decision. He lost again. As soon as the Courtof Appeal dismissed his appeal, he immediately launched this current motion to change,advancing virtually the same grounds as he had advanced before. When he did so, hewas in breach of numerous orders. He has finally complied with them, slowly,reluctantly and grudgingly.

[58]
Father’s behaviour in delivering a cheque for costs in the middle ofargument can only be viewed as either grandstanding or insulting to both the court andits processes.

[59]
All of that being said, I am not yet persuaded the father’s behaviour hasreached the very high level that would result in his being declared a vexatious litigant.
His clearly vexing behaviour, however, must be limited and curtailed in other ways.
The court has broad discretion to do so, and I intend to exercise my discretion in orderto impose limits on the father’s behavior. I set those limits out, in full, in theDisposition section of these reasons, below.

[60]
I turn now to one of those possible limits, namely, the requirement forsecurity for costs.

Security for costs

- 14 -

[61]
Mother asks for an order that father post security for costs as a conditionprecedent to his proceeding further. Rule 1(8) of the Family Law Rules permits thecourt to impose an order for costs if a person has failed to obey an order in a case.
Rule 56.01(c) of the Rule of Civil Procedure makes an order for security for costsavailable where the respondent has an order against the applicant for costs in the sameor another proceeding that remain unpaid in whole or in part. That is the case here.

[62]
Rule 56.01(e) permits an order for security for costs where there is goodreason to believe that the application is frivolous and vexatious and the applicant hasinsufficient assets in Ontario to pay the costs of the respondent.

[63]
Here, the current motion to change has many hallmarks of a frivolousvexatious proceeding, although I have not yet declared it so. The fact the variousoutstanding costs orders remained unpaid for so long, and still remain unpaid in partalso suggest a vexatious proceeding. I have not quite been prepared to strike thismotion to change on that basis, but am prepared to make an order for security forcosts as a method to ensure the process is fair to all parties, and to provide appropriateresources to this case.

[64]
If the mother is correct that the father’s current motion to change willlikely fail, she is likely to be awarded significant costs. She was awarded costs of over
$70,000 on the first motion to change, but these costs were not paid for nearly a yearand a half until the middle of argument on this motion to strike. Father’s delay inpayment, and his attitude in payment suggest to me the father may not have sufficientassets in Ontario to pay costs. He advised the court (although not in any swornstatement) that he had to borrow the money to pay the costs he proffered during themotion. As I see it, there is ample reason to require the father to post security forcosts as a precondition to his proceeding further.

[65]
This is the most appropriate way to address the father’s seemingreluctance to comply with court orders, while wishing to engage the court’s process forhis own benefit. As has been said many times, a party “cannot expect to come beforethis court and be given a voice in circumstances where he has thumbed his nose at thelegal system by deliberately breaching an order.”17

[66]
Therefore, within 30 days of the release of these reasons, the father shallpay the sum of $70,000 into court to the credit of this motion to change as security forthe mother’s costs. Of course, if the father succeeds on his motion to change and nocosts are awarded to the mother, he will receive the money back. If, however, he losesagain and significant costs are again awarded to the mother, she will be able to collect

17

- 15 -

- 16 without having to wait more than a year for father to comply with his obligations. Thisis an appropriate way to ensure the process is fair to all the parties.

[67]

The mother’s motion is therefore granted, in part, on the following terms:
a)

Within 30 days of the release of these reasons, the father shall pay to themother the outstanding accrued interest of $2,353.61 owing on the trialcosts order;

b)

Within 30 days of the release of these reasons, the father shall pay the sumof $70,000 into court to the credit of this motion to change as security forthe mother’s costs;

c)

Within the 30-day period outlined in (a) and (b) above, father is prohibitedfrom taking any further steps of any kind in this motion to change;

d)

If the father fails to comply fully and completely with paragraphs (a) and
(b) above, his motion to change is stayed, and he is prohibited from takingany further steps in the motion to change, or bring any motions of anynature or kind without first obtaining leave of this court to do so, even if hepays the sums set out in (a) and (b), above, but after the 30-day periodspecified;

e)

The mother’s motion to declare the father a vexatious litigant and thisproceeding a vexatious proceeding is dismissed, but without prejudice to itsbeing renewed at a later date;

f)

If the father fully and completely complies with paragraphs (a) and (b),above, then the mother shall have 45 days from the date of the father’scompliance to deliver an amended response to the motion to change;

g)

If, and only if, the mother delivers an amended response as contemplatedby (f), above, the father may reply to it, provided his reply is strictly limitedto replying only to new matters raised in the mother’s amended response.
The father’s reply, if any, shall be limited to no more than 10 pages inlength, including attachments or exhibits. It shall be delivered within 14
days of his being served with the mother’s amended response, failing whichhe shall be prohibited from delivering a reply;

h)

If the motion to change proceeds pursuant to compliance with (a), (b), (f)
and (g), above, the parties will schedule a combined settlement/trialmanagement conference to schedule necessary next steps. Apart from the

Disposition:

- 17 -

[68]
If the parties are unable to agree on the costs of this motion, they shallargue the issue in writing. The mother shall submit a bill of costs and submissionswithin 2 weeks of the release of these reasons. Submissions shall be no longer than 2
pages in length, excluding attachments.

[69]
The father shall respond in the same manner within 10 days of receivingthe mother’s submissions.

[70]
If mother is ultimately awarded costs of this motion, those costs may besatisfied out of the funds father is required to post as security for costs, as set out inparagraph 67(b), above.

___________________________
MESBUR J.
Released: 20170515

potential motion contemplated by (e), above, no further motions prior tothe hearing of the motion to change shall be permitted without leave of thecourt.

