CITATION: Ferro v Chicoine, 2017 ONSC 3013
COURT FILE NO.: 14-62531
DATE: 2017/05/16

RE:

Fabiola Ferro, ApplicantAND
Sylvain Chicoine, Respondent

BEFORE:

Justice Marc R. Labrosse

COUNSEL: Andrew Lister and Samara Belitzky, Counsel, for the ApplicantAlexander H. Duggan, Counsel, for the RespondentHEARD:

May 12, 2017
ENDORSEMENT ON MOTION

Background:

[1]

The Plaintiff brings this motion to amend the timetable and to require the Defendant to

provide a further and better Affidavit of Documents.

[2]

The Defendant seeks to dismiss the motion as the requirements for a further and better

affidavit of documents are not met. Further, there are issues of proportionality in this litigationwhich would make it unfair for the Defendant to be required to provide a synopsis for everydocument listed in Schedule A as there are well over 300 documents. The Defendant states thatin all the circumstances, it would be most efficient to simply allow the parties to proceed toexaminations for discovery and get on with the litigation.

[3]

Finally, the Defendant states that he has in fact made extensive efforts and inquiries to

ensure all relevant documents have been disclosed, and there exists no evidence to the contrary.
However, the Defendant provided no evidence in the context of this motion to support thiscontention.

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

AnalysisRule 30.03 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, requires a party to an

action to serve on every other party an affidavit of documents which lists and describes alldocuments relevant to any matter in issue in the action. This rule refers specifically to the formof Affidavit of Documents provided in Form 30A.

[5]

Form 30A then provides for the different schedules and each requires that the party

provide: the nature and date of the document and other particulars sufficient to identify it.
Under Schedule B – there is the additional requirement of stating the grounds for claimingprivilege for each document.

[6]

I have reviewed the affidavits of documents provided by each party. The Defendant has

not in my view served an Affidavit of Documents which complies with Rule 30.03. As for thePlaintiff, the original Affidavit of Document did not in my mind comply with the Schedule B
requirements. It is unclear at this point if the Plaintiff has other documents to list in Schedule B
however I agree with the Plaintiff’s counsel that every informal communication between a partyand their counsel need not be listed.

However, documents created such as opinion letters,

memoranda or reports generated during the litigation should be listed.

It is not sufficient to

simply list the boilerplate “all communications between the client and counsel” or “alldocuments prepared for litigation purposes”.

There must be sufficient detail to allow the

opposing party to understand the nature of the document and the reason for which privilege isclaimed.

[7]

When considering the affidavit of documents of the defendant, Schedule A does not

contain particulars sufficient to identify almost any of the documents. A brief description of thenature of the document must be provided.

Clearly, a synopsis of the document is not required

but some form of a brief description for each document is required.

However particularly in a

situation where the documents are not provided with the Affidavit of Documents, someparticulars of each is document are necessary to determine if a copy may be required or if itrequires specific inspection.

[4]

[8]

Finally, I agree with Counsel for the Plaintiff that there should be no references to Offers

to settle in the description of a document. The mere fact that an Offer to settle was made should

[9]

As for Schedule C, I do not believe that any further detail is required on the documents

which are no longer in the possession of the parties.

However, I note that the Defendant is

clearly on notice of the type of document that the Plaintiff is seeking. The Defendant should bein a position to answer as to the efforts he has or will be making to obtain those documentswhich are properly relevant to the litigation.

[10]

This is not a circumstance of making an order for a further and better affidavit under Rule

30.06 date to cure an omission or wrongful claim of privilege although it could be argued that thedocuments under Schedule B have been omitted.

It is simply an order to require compliance

with Rule 30.03 to provide an Affidavit of Documents which meets the requirements of Rule30.03.

[11]

In the end, the Defendant is ordered to serve an Affidavit of Documents which complies

with Rule 30.03 and form 30A. The Plaintiff will again review her Schedule B to ensure thateach document contemplated under the rules is listed, described and for which the claim forprivilege is indicated.

[12]

As for the documents contemplated by Schedule C, I will be available to hear any

necessary motion to seek the production of records from the NDP party.

While I caution the

parties with respect to which Parliamentary Privilege is being claimed. While no specific reliefhas been sought in this motion for documents which are now under the control of the NDP Party,the Plaintiff will be expected to communicate in writing with the NDP party, advise them of thisongoing litigation and request copies of the relevant documents.

[13]

I will make myself available to hear any motion arising from examinations for discovery

and other production issues.

not be part of the court file until the end of the trial or a specific proceeding within an action.

Amendment of the TimetableAs a result of my conclusion on the affidavits of documents, there are clearly good

reasons to amend the litigation timetable. I thus make the following order:
(a)

the Defendant will serve his amended Affidavit of Documents on or before May31, 2017.

In the event the Plaintiff must update her Affidavit of Documents, it

shall also be done on or before May 31, 2017;
(b)

the parties shall provide photocopies of requested documents on or before June30, 2017 provided the request for documents has been provided at least sevendays in advance;

(c)

the parties shall complete all examinations for discover by no later than July 31,2017;

(d)

all undertakings given during examinations for discover will be answered by nolater than August 29, 2017;

(e)

any motion arising out of examinations for discover, or the failure to fulfillundertakings or provide a position on advisements, will be heard no later thanOctober 31, 2017, subject to the reasonable availability of motion dates; and

(f)

either party may request a pretrial based on this litigation schedule no earlier thanNovember 30, 2017.

Costs

[15]

While the Plaintiff has also been ordered to review her Schedule B, I conclude that the

Plaintiff is entitled to her costs of this motion on a partial indemnity basis.

If the parties are

unable to agree, they may each submit costs submissions in writing within 15 days of thedelivery of this Endorsement.

Justice Marc R. Labrosse

[14]

Released: 2017/XX/XX

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
RE:

Fabiola Ferro, ApplicantAND
Sylvain Chicoine, Respondent

BEFORE:

Justice Marc R. Labrosse

COUNSEL: Andrew Lister and Samara Belitzky,Counsel, for the ApplicantAlexander H. Duggan, Counsel, for theRespondentHEARD:

May 12, 2017

ENDORSEMENT ON MOTION

Justice Marc R. Labrosse

Released: 2017/05/16

CITATION: Ferro v Chicoine, 2017 ONSC 3013
COURT FILE NO.: 14-62531
DATE: 2017/05/16

