SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO
RE:

Benjamin Paul Hatcher, ApplicantAND:
Jennifer Anne Golding, Respondent

BEFORE:

The Honourable Madam Justice L. Madsen

COUNSEL: Alisa P. Williams, Counsel, for the ApplicantTheodore M. Charuk, Counsel, for the RespondentHEARD:

In ChambersCOSTS ENDORSEMENT

[1]

This is the Costs Endorsement in relation to the eight-day trial in this matter, wherein themajority of the issues related to custody and access, in a mobility context. The Courtgranted the Respondent’s request that the parties’ two children reside primarily with herin Brampton, Ontario, denying the Applicant’s request that the children remain inHamilton, Ontario during the school week.

[2]

There is no question that the Respondent was successful at trial, having met or exceededevery element of her Offer to Settle. The challenging issues to be addressed in thisendorsement are to what extent, if any, the costs owed by the Applicant should accountfor the fact that this was a mobility case, which are so notoriously difficult to settle, andwhat can only be described as his precarious financial circumstances.

[3]

The Respondent seeks costs in the amount of $35,206.50 ($37,975 less 7 hours at $350
plus HST, per her Reply submissions) on a full recovery basis. The Applicant argues thatthere should be no award of costs, or, in the alternative, that the amount of costs shouldbe nominal.
LAW AND ANALYSIS

[4]

Both Rule 24, governing costs, and Rule 18, governing offers to settle, are at play in thiscosts decision.

CITATION: Hatcher v. Golding, 2017 ONSC 3135
COURT FILE NO.: 4459/15
DATE: 2017-05-26

2

[5]

In Serra v. Serra, O.J. No. 1905, the Ontario Court of Appeal held that modern Ontariocosts rules are designed to partially indemnify the successful litigant, to encouragesettlement, and to discourage and sanction inappropriate behaviour by litigants.

[6]

Under Rule 24(1) of the Family Law Rules, a successful party is presumptively entitled tocosts. A consideration of success is therefore the starting point in determining costs.
Sims-Howarth v. Bilcliffe, 2000 CarswellOnt 299.

[7]

Where there are Offers to Settle, the success of a party should be measured against anysettlement offers made by either party. Rule 18 provides that Offers to Settle must be inwriting and signed both by the party and his or her lawyer. To fall within the rule, anOffer to Settle must be served at least seven days before trial, and must not be withdrawnprior to trial.

[8]

Rule 18(14) sets out the cost consequences of failing to accept an Offer to Settle.

[9]

Both parties served Offers to Settle in this case. Reviewing those Offers to Settle, it isclear that the Respondent was successful at trial in relation to her Offer to Settle servedOctober 5, 2014, two months before the commencement of the trial. The Respondent’sOffer to Settle met the requirements of Rule 18. The Applicant should have accepted theRespondent’s Offer to Settle.

[10]

The Respondent exceeded her Offer to Settle on the following issues: The Court grantedher sole custody rather than joint custody as offered; the Court provided that theApplicant’s week-ends would end on Sunday evenings rather than on Monday mornings;and the Court ordered table child support under section 3 of the Child SupportGuidelines, where there Respondent had offered a child support holiday for 24 months.

[11]

The Respondent met her Offer to Settle on the following issues: The Court grantedprimary residency of the children to her; the Court provided that the Applicant wouldhave parenting time with the children three weekends out of four; the Court provided thatholidays would be shared equally; the Court provided for week-about time-sharing duringthe children’s summer break from school; and the Court provided that special andextraordinary expenses would be shared in proportion to income.

[12]

Conversely, the result for the Applicant fell short of his Offer to Settle, dated September20, 2016, on most issues. Joint custody was not awarded, the residential scheduleawarded was not that sought by the Applicant, and child support was not ordered to bepaid in accordance with section 9 of the Child Support Guidelines. The Applicant didmeet his Offer to Settle with respect to holiday time, and in relation to special andextraordinary expenses, where his proposals were similar to those of the Respondent.
However, his Offer to Settle was not severable.

Success

3

[13]

Overall, the Respondent was successful at trial on the issues central to the litigation,namely primary residency, her ability to move the children to Brampton and enroll themin school in that community, and decision-making.

[14]

Rule 24(4) directs the Court to consider whether a successful party has “behavedunreasonably” during the case, in which case she may be deprived of all or part of hercosts.

[15]

I do not find that the Respondent behaved unreasonably during this case. She made herbest efforts to share information related to parenting with the Applicant from separationand through to trial, attempted to involve him on issues related to the children. Shesought his input and views. While it could be argued that it was not reasonable of theRespondent to enroll the children in school in Brampton during the summer of 2015,before she had consulted with the Applicant, the Court found that this took place whencommunication between the parties was difficult at best, and everything, including theschedule, was unsettled. There is no basis under Rule 24(4) to disentitle the Respondentto costs.
Divided Success

[16]

Under Rule 24(6), where success is divided, the Court may apportion costs “asappropriate”.

[17]

Success was not divided in this case.
Bad Faith

[18]

Under Rule 24(8), where a party has acted in bad faith, the Court must decide costs on afull recovery basis.

[19]

Neither party in this case has alleged bad faith on the part of the other. Having consideredthe parties’ respective conduct throughout this litigation, I do not find that either hasacted in a manner that would constitute bad faith.
Costs to be decided at Each Step

[20]

Rule 24(10) requires that costs are to be decided at each step in a case. A trial judgeshould not make an Order for costs in relation to an earlier step in a case where no costswere ordered. Islam v. Rahman, 2007 ONCA 622.

[21]

The Respondent’s Bill of Costs includes time spent in relation to completing andreviewing the Trial Management Brief, preparing the Trial Scheduling EndorsementForm, and attending the Trial Management Conference on October 13, 2016. Costs werenot addressed at that conference and should not be included in the Bill of Costs. TheRespondent’s Bill of Costs should be reduced by 4.5 hours.

Unreasonableness

4
Application of Rule 24(11)
Under Rule 24(11), the Court must consider the following factors in determining costs:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

The importance, complexity, or difficulty of the issues;The reasonableness or unreasonableness of each party’s behaviour in the case;The lawyers’ rates;The time properly spent on the case;Expenses properly payable; andAny other relevant matter.

[23]

There is no question that the issues in this trial were extremely important to both theApplicant and the Respondent. The issues were not complex, legally or factually,however, nor were they difficult.

[24]

I do not find that either party’s behaviour in the case was unreasonable, as contemplatedunder Rule 24(11). I have already commented on the Respondent’s decision tounilaterally enroll the children in school in Brampton in the summer of 2015. While I
found that the Applicant’s behaviour with respect to what was referred to as the “dentaldebacle” in the trial decision was unreasonable, I do not find that it was so unreasonableas to have a specific impact on the costs determination herein.

[25]

Considering Rule 24(11)(c), I have no difficulty with Mr. Charuk’s rate in this case. Thesubmissions indicate that he assisted the Respondent at the reduced rate of $350 per hourcompared with his regular rate of $420. Mr. Charuk is a senior and experienced familylawyer. His rate is appropriate.

[26]

Turning to Rule 24(11)(d), I have already commented on the inclusion of time on the Billof Costs in relation to the Trial Management Conference. I concluded that Mr. Charuk’sbill should be reduced by 4.5 hours. This equates to $1,575 plus HST of $204.75.

[27]

Regarding “expenses properly payable”, under Rule 24(11), the Respondent has notclaimed any disbursements.
Any Other Relevant Matter

[28]

Notwithstanding the guidance and directives to the judge in Rule 24, the rule has notcompletely removed the discretion of the trial judge in setting costs. Van Rassel v. VanRassel, 2008 CarswellOnt 6600.

[29]

Under Rule 24(11)(f), the Court is to consider “any other relevant matter”.

[30]

There are three matters which are important to consider which have not been addressedabove: first, that this case concerned mobility; second, the status quo leading up to thetrial; and third, that the Applicant’s financial circumstances are precarious.

[22]

[31]

At the core of the case was the question of whether the Respondent should be permittedto move the children to Brampton, to attend school there. Although Brampton is not farfrom Hamilton, in kilometres, practically speaking, any outcome with shared parentingtime would have been very difficult to implement, and would have required considerabletravel time for the children in a region where heavy traffic is an important factor.

[32]

In Van Rassel supra, Justice Mossip commented on the challenges inherent in mobilitycases:
There is no other area of family law litigation in which the idea of awinner and a loser is less applicable than that of a mobility case. It is alsotrue that even with the very best parents, it is the area where “win-win”
solutions can rarely if ever be fashioned. Parents involved in a mobilitydispute have to resort to the courts, because even with the best ofintentions, and with both parties doing their best to put their children’sinterests before their own, they cannot find a solution to the desire of oneparent to move with the child, and the other parent vehemently resistingthat move.”

[33]

Similarly in Bridgeman v. Balfour, 2009 CarswellOnt 7214, Justice Parayeski noted thatthe presence of a mobility dispute makes settlement very difficult. In that case, althoughthe Applicant was successful, she was denied costs of the trial.

[34]

Whether costs are appropriate in a mobility case depends on the unique facts of the case.

[35]

In this case, while mobility was a central component of the litigation, the circumstanceswere less attenuated than in cases where parents propose to live provinces or countriesapart. As was noted at the outset of the trial decision, “fortunately for the children, it isfeasible for [the children] to spend meaningful, regular time with both parents throughoutthe year, notwithstanding that this is a mobility case.” See paragraph 2.

[36]

Having said that, there is no question that this case was more difficult to settle because ofthe proposed move of the children. Had the parties been negotiating a parenting schedulewithin Hamilton, I think it far more likely that they would have been able to reach aresolution without the need for a trial. In my view, this mobility dimension, in this case,serves to mitigate (although not eliminate) the Applicant’s costs exposure.

[37]

A second issue to be considered under Rule 24(11)(f) is the status quo leading in to thetrial. As set out in the trial decision, the children had been residing with the Applicant inHamilton during the school week for over a year, and spending time with the Respondentthree week-ends out of four. The children had lived in Hamilton for many years.
Although the Court found, for the detailed reasons set out in the trial decision, that it wasin the children’s best interests to reside primarily with the Respondent in Brampton, itwas not unreasonable for the Applicant to proceed to trial seeking essentially to continuethe status quo. While the Court’s conclusion was that the status quo should be changed, it

5

6

[38]

A final issue to be considered in this case under Rule 24(11)(f), is the financial situationof the Applicant and the potential impact of an award of costs against him.

[39]

At trial, it was clear that the Applicant’s financial circumstances are precarious. Althoughhe consented to the income of $36,865 per year being used for child support purposes, atthe time of the trial he had been laid off from seasonal employment and was notemployed. His financial statement, sworn November 9, 2016, showed a net worth of
$6,199.82. That financial statement also showed monthly expenses of $2,998.82, before aconsideration of monthly child support which the Court found to be payable, in theamount of $533 per month. He is paying $200 per month towards a Visa account and notmaking his monthly payments of $173 towards his student loans. None of Applicant’sexpenses are excessive.

[40]

Courts have held that while impecuniosity is not a shield against a costs award, at thesame time, an award of costs should not jeopardize a parent’s ability to exercise theaccess deemed to be in the children’s best interests. Thus in Rawn v. Laviolette, 2007
CarswellOnt 6050, a case where both parents were found to be acting in what theyperceived to be the children’s best interests, Justice Linhares de Sousa held that theApplicant should receive “some” contribution to his costs in a case where “neither partycould afford this trial.” Similarly in Tesfamariam v. Drar, 2009 CarswellOnt 6425, theCourt stressed that having limited resources does not amount to an immunity againstcosts; however, impecuniosity may affect the quantum of costs. The Court stated:
The most significant issue in determining the quantum of costs is Ms.Tesfamariam’s ability to pay, which can be considered as any otherrelevant matter pursuant to subrule 24(11)(f): see M.(C.A.) v. M.(D.)
(2003), 67 O.R. (3d) 181 (Ont. C.A.). Although Ms. Tesfariam’s limitedfinancial resources do not afford her immunity from a costs order, theywill affect the quantum of costs.

[41]

In M.(C.A.) v. M.(D.) (2003), 2003 CarswellOnt 3606, the Ontario Court of Appeal heldthat under Rule 18(14), the Court has discretion not to make an award of full recoveryeven where, as here, the party has met the conditions in Rule 18(14). The Court stated
“Again, a relevant consideration would be the financial condition of the parties.”

[42]

In this case, I have grave concerns about the impact of an award of full recovery costsagainst the Applicant, given his financial circumstances. Under the decision at trial, he isto have the children in his care three weekends out of four. He requires the ability tomaintain appropriate housing with at least two bedrooms for the children to becomfortable during his parenting time. He requires the ability to provide for the childrenwhen they are with him. And, he must have the ability to pay the table child support inthe amount of $533 per month, which was provided for in the Trial Decision. The awardof costs sought by the Respondent would compromise the Applicant’s ability to provide

was not unreasonable, in the context of the proposed move, to seek the Court’sdetermination of the parenting arrangement in the children’s best interests.

7
an appropriate environment for the children during his time with them, and couldcompromise his ability to pay table child support as ordered.

[43]

There is discretion under Rule 24 to award an amount of costs which appears just in all ofthe circumstances. In assessing costs, the overriding principle is one of reasonableness.
The costs order should reflect what the Court views as the fair and reasonable amountthat should be paid by the unsuccessful party, rather than an exact measure of the actualcosts of the litigant.

[44]

In all of the circumstances of this case, balancing the fact that the Respondent wassuccessful at trial, that this was a mobility case and therefore difficult to settle, that theApplicant had the benefit of the status quo going into the trial and was thus not actingunreasonably in taking his case forward, and his current precarious financialcircumstances, I find that the fair and reasonable quantum for the Applicant to pay ascosts is $12,500 inclusive of HST. I note that his sworn financial statement indicates thathe has an investment with the Investments Planning Counsel having a value of $7,000.
On that basis, $6,250 of the costs amount shall be paid forthwith, and the balance shall bepaid at the rate of $150 each month until paid in full, unless the parties agree otherwise.
Interest shall accrue at the post-judgment interest rate set out in the Courts of Justice Act.

Madsen, J.
Date: May 26, 2017

QUANTUM

