CITATION: Intact Insurance v. 2229152 Ontario Limited, 2017 ONSC 3282
COURT FILE NO.: 2169/17
DATE: 2017-05-26

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

INTACT INSURANCE
Applicant )
– and –
2229152 ONTARIO LIMITED o/a ROYAL )
WINDSOR COLLISION CENTRE
Respondent

Lisa M. Carr, for the Applicant (RespondingParty)

Adam Jarvis, for the Respondent (MovingParty)

HEARD: May 24, 2017

GRAY J.

[1]

The Repair and Storage Liens Act provides for expedited procedures to determine

disputes between those who repair and/or store articles, particularly motor vehicles, and thosewho own them.

[2]

Many such disputes involve motor vehicles that have been involved in accidents. Most

often, such vehicles are towed to repair and storage facilities.
assessments as to whether such vehicles can be repaired or not.

Insurance companies makeIt is usually the insurance

companies that deal with the repair/storage facilities on whether a vehicle will be repaired, whatit will cost, and what other charges, such as towing and storage, will be.

[3]

In some cases, the car is regarded as a total loss. That is when many disputes arise.

The car will sometimes sit in the storage facility accumulating storage charges. To get the carreleased, the charges have to be paid.
accumulate.

The longer the car sits there, the more the charges

ONTARIO

[4]

The storage facility wants to collect all of its storage charges. The insurer wants to get

the car, but does not want to pay exorbitant storage charges.
This is one of those cases. The respondent (“Royal Windsor”) has in its possession a

car that has effectively been written off by Intact Insurance (“Intact”), the applicant.
Windsor wants to collect roughly $25,000 in storage charges.

Royal

Intact thinks that amount is

exorbitant. Intact is prepared to pay something, but not what Royal Windsor wants.

[6]

The dispute is over how the impasse is to be resolved.

[7]

Intact wants to pay the amount claimed by Royal Windsor into court, get the car, and

fight over the amount owing later.

[8]

Royal Windsor wants to keep the car and apply to the Small Claims Court for a simple

order deciding how much is to be paid for the storage charges.

[9]

Competing applications have been filed in the Small Claims Court and in this court.

Royal Windsor now moves for an order terminating Intact’s proceedings in this court (to pay themoney into court, release the car, and determine the amount owing later) and simply allow RoyalWindsor’s Small Claims Court application to proceed.

[10]

For the reasons that follow, I will order that Intact’s application in this court be

transferred to the Small Claims Court and consolidated with Royal Windsor’s application in theSmall Claims Court.
Background

[11]

On February 17, 2016, a Jeep Grand Cherokee, owned by one Samuel Sevazelian, was

damaged in an accident. It was insured by the applicant, Intact.

[12]

On the same day, Mr. Sevazelian reported the accident to Intact, and advised that the

Jeep was located at the Royal Windsor Collision Centre.

[13]

On February 19, 2016, an appraiser retained by Intact attended at Royal Windsor and

determined that the Jeep was a total loss.

[5]

[14]

On February 23, 2017, a representative of Intact contacted Royal Windsor and was

advised that the payout was $687.66 for towing and $25,289.40 for 373 days at $60 per day for

[15]

As of March 3, 2016, Intact had settled the property damage claim for the loss of the

Jeep with Mr. Sevazelian, and the Jeep was transferred to Intact.

[16]

On April 21, 2017, a representative of Intact wrote to Royal Windsor to confirm the

amount of fees being claimed and to provide an offer to resolve the dispute.

[17]

On May 11, 2017, Royal Windsor applied to the Burlington Small Claims Court

pursuant to s. 23 of the Repair and Storage Liens Act, requesting a determination that RoyalWindsor has a valid lien on the Jeep, and a determination that the lien is in the amount of
$24,642.66.

Royal Windsor has confirmed that it has abandoned any claim in excess of that

amount in order that the Small Claims Court have jurisdiction over the dispute. The BurlingtonSmall Claims Court has fixed a date of June 22, 2017 to hear the application.

[18]

The application by Royal Windsor under s.23 of the Repair and Storage Liens Act was

served on Intact on May 12, 2017.

[19]

On May 12, 2017, Intact made application to this court for an initial certificate under s.

24 of Repair and Storage Liens Act, and paid into court the amount of $32,000 in the full amountclaimed by Royal Windsor, which amount included the payment into court of $4,395.70 as anoffer to settle the dispute. On May 12, 2017, an initial certificate under s.24 of the Act wasissued by the registrar, certifying that Intact had paid into court the amount of $32,000, being thefull amount claimed by Royal Windsor, and which amount includes the payment into court of
$4,395.70 in settlement of the dispute.

[20]

By letter of the same day, May 12, 2017, a paralegal in the office of counsel for Intact

wrote to Royal Windsor confirming that Royal Windsor was served with the initial certificateunder s.24 of the Act on May 12, 2017, and requested release of the car. A further request for thecar was sent on May 15, 2017.

storage.

Submissions

[21]

Mr. Jarvis, counsel for Royal Windsor, the moving party, submits that the procedures

Royal Windsor commenced its application under s.23 of the Act first, and that proceeding musttake precedence.

[22]

Mr. Jarvis submits that while his client’s claim actually exceeds $25,000, his client has

deliberately restricted the amount of its claim to less than $25,000.

Thus, the Small Claims

Court has jurisdiction to entertain his client’s application.

[23]

Intact’s application, on the other hand, was instituted in this court, and the amount of

$32,000 has been paid into court.

[24]

Mr. Jarvis submits that it would be far more economical and efficient to have the

proceeding dealt with in the Small Claims Court as opposed to this court.

Furthermore, he

submits that the jurisdiction of the court that hears a dispute under s. 23 of the Act is very broad,and clearly includes a determination of the amount of the lien that can be claimed by RoyalWindsor, and an ability to require the appropriate amount to be paid to Royal Windsor.

[25]

In the final analysis, Mr. Jarvis submits that there are significant policy reasons why the

matter should be determined in the Small Claims Court as opposed to this court. Fundamentally,however, he submits that in view of the fact that his client commenced its proceeding first, thiscourt is deprived of jurisdiction to entertain Intact’s application under s. 24 of the Act.

[26]

Mr. Jarvis particularly relies on the wording of s. 23(2) of the Act. Section 23 of the

Act, with the words of s.23(2) that are particularly relied on highlighted, is as follows:
23. (1) Any person may apply to a court for a determination of the rights of theparties where a question arises with respect to,
(a) the seizure of an article under Part II (Non-possessory Liens), any right ofseizure in respect of the article, whether the costs of seizure are recoverable orwhether they exceed the amount permitted under subsection 14 (3.1);
(b) the sale of an article under Part III (Redemption, Sale or Other Disposition);

under ss. 23 and 24 of Repair and Storage Liens Act are mutually exclusive. He submits that

(c) the distribution of the proceeds of the sale of an article under Part III,including the right of any person to share in those proceeds, and the obligation ofany lien claimant to account for those proceeds;
(e) any other matter arising out of the application of this Act,and the court may make such order as it considers necessary to give effect tothose rights.
(2) An application shall not be made under clause (1) (d) where an applicationhas been made under section 24.
[Emphasis added]

[27]

Mr. Jarvis points out and relies on the words “has been made” in s. 23(2). He submits

that the court is only deprived of jurisdiction to make an order under s. 23(1)(d) where anapplication under s. 24 “has been” made. His client’s application falls under s. 23(1)(d), and atthe time it was filed there was no application under s. 24.

Accordingly, Intact’s subsequent

application under s. 24 can have no effect on his client’s application.

[28]

Mr. Jarvis relies on Hamilton v. 1262108 Ontario Inc. (2001), 55 O.R. (3d) 19 (C.A.);

and Dew v. MCM Towing, [2014] O.J. No. 6230 (Small Claims Court).

[29]

Ms. Carr, counsel for Intact, the responding party, submits that Royal Windsor’s

motion should be dismissed, and Intact’s application under s.24 of the Act should proceed to itsconclusion. In the alternative, although Ms. Carr does not urge this result, the court could orderthat Intact’s application under s.24 of the Act be transferred to the Burlington Small ClaimsCourt to be consolidated with the application under s.23. Some of the funds in court, consistingof the amount now claimed by Royal Windsor, would be transferred to the credit of theBurlington Small Claims Court application, and the car would be released.

[30]

Ms. Carr submits that while the procedures under ss.23 and 24 of the Act are considered

to be mutually exclusive, that simply means that relief can be awarded only under one of them.
She submits that there is nothing that would prohibit both applications to be filed, and if they are,it will be for the court to fashion a mechanism to determine the underlying dispute in areasonable manner.

(d) the amount of a lien or the right of any person to a lien; and

[31]

Ms. Carr points out that s. 24 of the Act applies only where there is a possessory lien, as

opposed to a non-possessory lien. A possessory lien arises where repair work or storage has

the vehicle is given up, the possessory lien is lost. Section 24 provides a mechanism to allow forcash to be substituted for the vehicle. Possession of the vehicle can be given up, and the courtcan resolve the dispute as to which party is entitled to the cash, and how much.

[32]

Ms. Carr points out that under s. 24 of the Act, judicial involvement only comes about

after money has been paid into court and the car has been released. At that point, the court willbe involved to resolve the dispute as to how much money, if any, the repairer or storage facilityis entitled to. The money is in court, so the repairer or storage facility is fully protected. It nolonger needs to keep the car.

[33]

Ms. Carr submits that s. 23 of the Act is much broader in its terms. It applies where

virtually any dispute arises under the Act.

However, significantly, pursuant to s. 23(2), the

procedure under s.23 cannot be utilized where the dispute involves the amount of a lien or theright of any person to a lien, where an application has been made under s. 24.

[34]

Ms. Carr submits that it would not be appropriate to interpret the words “has been

made” in s. 23(2) to mean that the court must focus on the time at which each application hasbeen brought.

If that were the case, the so-called jurisdictional issue would be resolved by

determining which party has won the foot race to the courthouse. A more sensible interpretation,Ms. Carr submits, is to conclude that the legislature has clearly said that where the essence of thedispute is the amount of money the repairer or storage facility is entitled to, and the owner orinsurer wishes to retrieve the vehicle, the simple and expeditious procedure under s. 24 is toprevail if it is used.

[35]

Ms. Carr relies on 1218897 Ontario Ltd. (c.o.b. Castle Auto Collision & Mechanical

Service) v. Certas Insurance, [2016] O.J. No. 264 (Div. Ct.); 1218897 Ontario Ltd. (c.o.b. CastleAuto Collision & Mechanical Service) v. McEachern, [2016] O.J. No. 1702 (Small ClaimsCourt); 2237446 Ontario Inc. (c.o.b. 409 Collision Centre) (2011)) v. Intact Insurance, [2016]
O.J. No. 6336 (S.C.J.); 1218897 Ontario Ltd. (c.o.b. Castle Auto Collision and Mechanical

been provided, and the repairer or storage facility has possession of the vehicle. If possession of

Service) v. Intact Insurance Co., [2013] O.J. No. 6508 (Small Claims Court); and Deol v.
Motosport Recovery Storage Facilities, [2013] O.J. No. 6208 (Small Claims Court).

[36]

Tactical considerations loom large in resolving in what appears to be a rather simple

dispute.

[37]

The real dispute is whether Royal Windsor can recover a large amount of storage

charges where the car has been written off and has little value. The insurer obviously does notwant to pay any more than a minimal amount of storage charges in order to get the car.

[38]

Unless Royal Windsor can establish that there is an actual agreement as to how much in

the way of storage fees it can charge (and it is doubtful it can do so), the real dispute is what is areasonable amount that Royal Windsor can charge.

[39]

Royal Windsor does not want to give up the car before having the amount it is entitled

to determined. It wants to retain as much leverage as it can.

[40]

Right now, Royal Windsor has a date in small claims court of June 22, 2017 to have its

claim determined. It wants to keep that date, rather than have its claim for money paid into courtdetermined, potentially many months later.

[41]

Intact, on the other hand, wants to get the car and salvage as much as it can out of it. It

can only do so once it gets its hands on the car. Section 24 of the Act provides a solution – Intactcan pay the disputed amount into court and get the car right away. A fight over the money cantake place later.

[42]

These tactical considerations can play little part in resolving the dispute.

It can be

resolved by considering ss. 23 and 24 of the Act in the context of the statute as a whole. I haveattached as an Appendix the relevant provisions excerpted from the Repair and Storage LiensAct.

Analysis

[43]

The statute deals with both “possessory liens” and “non-possessory liens”.

They are

similar, in that they attach to articles to which repairs have been effected and/or that have been

[44]

Pursuant to articles 3 and 4 of the Act, a repairer and/or storer has a lien for unpaid

amounts for repair or storage, and the repairer or storer may retain possession of the article untilthe charges have been paid.

[45]

A non-possessory lien arises where a person entitled to a possessory lien gives up

possession of the article without having been paid the amount to which the lien claimant isentitled.

[46]

Section 24 of the Act is available only in the case of a possessory lien.

[47]

Under s. 24, what is set out is an expeditious procedure for the return of the article to

the owner, and the substitution of cash in court for the article, and a mechanism is set out for thedetermination of the dispute, usually over the amount owing. The lien holder is fully protected,because the full amount of his or her claim is paid into court.

[48]

In substance, what is set out is a procedure under which the owner (or insurer) can

apply for an “initial certificate”, and at the same time pay the full amount of the lien claim intocourt. Within three days, the lien claimant must release the article or file a notice of objection,claiming there should be an additional amount owing.

Where the lien claimant pays the

additional amount claimed into court, the clerk or registrar shall issue a final certificate, afterwhich the lien claimant must immediately release the article. If it is not released, the applicantmay obtain a writ of seizure and require the sheriff to seize the article.

[49]

Thus, as can be seen, s. 24 is narrow in its scope. It provides for a simple, expeditious

procedure to be utilized in one narrow circumstance – that is, where the real matter in dispute isthe amount of the lien claim, and the lien claimant has possession of the article. In such a case,the article can be released in exchange for cash in court in the amount of the lien claim. Theentitlement to the money in court can be fought out in court later.

stored.

[50]

Section 23 of the Act, on the hand, applies to virtually any other case that can arise

under the Act. It is very broad in its scope.
Section 23 can be used where the dispute relates to the amount of a lien or the right of

any person to a lien.

Of significance, however, such a claim cannot be pursued “where an

application has been made under s. 24.”

[52]

I do not accept the argument of Mr. Jarvis that the words “has been” mean that where

an application under s. 23 has been commenced first, the court is deprived of jurisdiction toentertain an application under s. 24.

As noted by Ms. Carr, to accept such an interpretation

would mean that the legislature intended that the jurisdiction of the court would depend on whichparty won the race to the courthouse steps. It is more sensible, in my view, to interpret s. 23(2)
as carving out an exception to the broad scope of s. 23, where s. 24 is applicable and is beingused.

On such an interpretation, the words “has been” do not take on the temporal limitation

urged by Mr. Jarvis, rather they signify a jurisdictional limitation on the ambit of s. 23.

[53]

That is not to say that the court, in appropriate circumstances, cannot impose a

limitation on the use of s. 24 where it appears that it is being abused, or might be abused. Forexample, if a proceeding under s. 23 has been underway for some time, and is about to bedetermined, the late utilization of s. 24 might not be regarded as appropriate.

In the right

circumstances, the court could, pursuant to s. 106 of the Courts of Justice Act, stay an applicationunder s. 24.

[54]

Of significance, in my view, is s. 25 of the Act, which provides that an application

“may be brought in any court of appropriate monetary jurisdiction.” Clearly, this is intended togive jurisdiction to the Small Claims Court where the amount in dispute is less than $25,000.

[55]

That brings me to the appropriate resolution of this case. Royal Windsor has restricted

the amount of its claim to less than $25,000. Indeed, it did so in order to give the Small ClaimsCourt jurisdiction over its application under s. 23 of the Act. Since the amount in dispute isunder $25,000, I see no reason why Intact’s application under s. 24 of the Act should not beheard and determined in the Small Claims Court.

[51]

[56]

It is clear that a judge of this court has the inherent jurisdiction to transfer a proceeding

in this court to the Small Claims Court: see Shoppers Trust Co. v. Mann Taxi Management Ltd.

(3d) 391 (Ont. Gen. Div.); and Roberts v. 603418 Ontario Inc. (c.o.b. J.P. Motor Sales), [2014]
O.J. No. 5048 (S.C.J.).
Disposition

[57]

I order as follows:
a) This application under s. 24 of the Repair and Storage Liens Act shall betransferred to the Burlington Small Claims court and consolidated withBurlington Small Claims Court File no. 490/17 RSLA;b) The sum of $24,642.66, currently held by the Accountant of this court tothe credit of court file no. 2169/17, shall be transferred to the credit of theBurlington Small Claims court file no. 490/17 RSLA;c) The balance of the money in court, to the credit of court file no. 2169/17,shall be returned to the applicant, Intact Insurance.

[58]

Any further proceedings under s. 24 must be processed in the Small Claims Court. At

this point, there is only an initial certificate.

As far as I know, no objection has been filed

pursuant to s. 24(7). Any requirement to release the vehicle flows from s. 24 of the Act, and doesnot require an order of the court.

[59]

I will entertain brief written submissions as to costs, not to exceed three pages, together

with a costs outline.

Ms. Carr shall have five days and Mr. Jarvis an additional five days to

respond. Ms. Carr shall have three days to reply.

Gray J.
Released: May 26, 2017

(1993), 16 O.R. (3d) 192 (Gen. Div.); Graves v. Avis Rent-a-Car System Inc. (1993), 21 C.P.C.

AppendixExcerpts from the Repair and Storage Liens Act

“lien claimant” means a person who is entitled to claim a lien for the repair, storage or storageand repair of an article;
“repair” means an expenditure of money on, or the application of labour, skill or materials to,an article for the purpose of altering, improving or restoring its properties or maintaining itscondition and includes,
(a) the transportation of the article for purpose of making a repair,
(b) the towing of an article,
(c) the salvage of an article;
“repairer” means a person who makes a repair on the understanding that the person will bepaid for the repair;
“storer” means a person who receives an article for storage or storage and repair on theunderstanding that the person will be paid for the storage or storage and repair, as the casemay be.
3. (1) In the absence of a written agreement to the contrary, a repairer has a lien against an articlethat the repairer has repaired for an amount equal to one of the following, and the repairer mayretain possession of the article until the amount is paid:
1. The amount that the person who requested the repair agreed to pay.
2. Where no such amount has been agreed upon, the fair value of the repair, determined inaccordance with any applicable regulations.
3. Where only part of a repair is completed, the fair value of the part completed, determinedin accordance with any applicable regulations.
(2) A repairer’s lien arises and takes effect when the repair is commenced, except that norepairer’s lien arises if the repairer was required to comply with sections 56 and 57, subsection58 (1) and section 59 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2002, if applicable, and the repairer hasnot done so.
4. (1) Subject to subsection (2), a storer has a lien against an article that the storer has stored orstored and repaired for an amount equal to one of the following, and the storer may retainpossession of the article until the amount is paid:
1. The amount agreed upon for the storage or storage and repair of the article.
2. Where no such amount has been agreed upon, the fair value of the storage or storage andrepair, determined in accordance with any applicable regulations.

1. (1) In this Act,

(2) A storer is not entitled to a lien for a repair made to an article unless the repair is made by thestorer on the understanding that the storer would be paid for the repair or unless subsection 28
(2) applies.
(3) A storer’s lien arises and takes effect when the storer receives possession of the article forstorage or storage and repair, except that no storer’s lien arises with respect to repair if the storerwas required to comply with sections 56 and 57, subsection 58 (1) and section 59 ofthe Consumer Protection Act, 2002, if applicable, and the storer has not done so.
(4) Where the storer knows or has reason to believe that possession of an article that is subject toa lien was received from a person other than its owner or a person having its owner’s authority,the storer, within 60 days after the day of receiving the article, shall give written notice of thelien to every person whom the storer knows or has reason to believe is the owner or has aninterest in the article, including every person who has a security interest in the article that isperfected by registration under the Personal Property Security Actagainst the name of the personwhom the storer knows or has reason to believe is the owner.
(7) The storer has the right to sell an article that is subject to a lien in accordance with Part III
(Redemption, Sale or Other Disposition) upon the expiration of the sixty-day period followingthe day on which the amount required to pay for the storage or storage and repair becomes due.
5. A lien under this Part is discharged and cannot be revived as an interest in the article ifpossession of the article that is subject to the lien is surrendered to, or lawfully comes into thepossession of, the owner or any other person who is entitled to receive a notice under subsection15 (2).
7. (1) A lien claimant who is entitled to a lien under Part I (Possessory Liens) against an article,and who gives up possession of the article without having been paid the full amount of the lien towhich the lien claimant is entitled under Part I, has, in place of the possessory lien, a nonpossessory lien against the article for the amount of the lien claimed under Part I that remainsunpaid.
(2) A non-possessory lien arises and takes effect when the lien claimant gives up possession ofthe article.
10. (1) A non-possessory lien is enforceable against third parties only if a claim for lien has beenregistered, and, where a person acquires a right against an article after a non-possessory lienarises, the right of the person has priority over the non-possessory lien of the lien claimant if aclaim for lien was not registered before the person acquired the right.
12. (1) A non-possessory lien is discharged and cannot be revived as an interest in the article,
(b) upon payment into court under Part IV (Dispute Resolution) of the amount set out in theclaim for lien;15. (1) A lien claimant who has a right, under this Act, to sell an article shall not exercise thatright unless the lien claimant has given notice of intention to sell the article.

3. Where only part of a repair is completed, the fair value of the storage and the part of therepair completed, determined in accordance with any applicable regulations. 2014,

16. (1) Where a lien claimant has sold an article under this Part, the proceeds of sale shall beapplied consecutively,

(b) to the costs of seizure;
(c) where the lien claimant making the sale has a possessory lien under Part I, to thesatisfaction of the lien of the lien claimant making the sale;
(d) where the lien claimant making the sale has a possessory lien under Part I, to thesatisfaction of the lien of every lien claimant who has a registered non-possessory lienunder Part II against the article, who gives the lien claimant making the sale writtennotice of the amount owing in respect of the registered non-possessory lien claimed bythe person giving the notice before or within ten days after the sale, in reverse order to theorder in which the lien claimants gave up possession;
(e) where the lien claimant making the sale has a non-possessory lien under Part II, to thesatisfaction of the lien of the lien claimant making the sale and to the satisfaction of thelien of every other lien claimant who has a registered non-possessory lien under Part II
against the article, who gives the lien claimant making the sale written notice of theamount owing in respect of the registered non-possessory lien claimed by the persongiving the notice before or within ten days after the sale, in reverse order to the order inwhich the lien claimants gave up possession;
(f) to the payment of every person who has a perfected security interest in the article underthe Personal Property Security Act who was entitled to notice under subsection 15 (2),who gives the lien claimant written notice of the amount owing in respect of the perfectedsecurity interest claimed by the person giving the notice before or within ten days afterthe sale, in accordance with the priority rules under that Act; and
(g) to the payment of the owner or other person entitled thereto, if the lien claimant has actualknowledge of the claim of that person.
(2) Where there is a question concerning the right of any person to share in the proceeds of asale, the lien claimant may pay the proceeds or any part thereof into court and the proceeds shallnot be paid out of court except in accordance with an order made under section 23.
18. Where a lien claimant,
(a) sells an article under section 15; or
(b) is deemed to have elected irrevocably to retain the article under subsection 17 (4),the lien claimant shall be deemed to have sold the article or retained the article in full satisfactionof the amount owing in respect of the lien.
22. At any time before the lien claimant,
(a) has sold the article under section 15 or contracted for such sale;

(a) to the reasonable expenses of selling the article;

(b) is deemed to have irrevocably elected to retain the article under section 17; or
(c) has given the article to a charity under section 19,

23. (1) Any person may apply to a court for a determination of the rights of the parties where aquestion arises with respect to,
(a) the seizure of an article under Part II (Non-possessory Liens), any right of seizure inrespect of the article, whether the costs of seizure are recoverable or whether they exceedthe amount permitted under subsection 14 (3.1);
(b) the sale of an article under Part III (Redemption, Sale or Other Disposition);
(c) the distribution of the proceeds of the sale of an article under Part III, including the rightof any person to share in those proceeds, and the obligation of any lien claimant toaccount for those proceeds;
(d) the amount of a lien or the right of any person to a lien; and
(e) any other matter arising out of the application of this Act,and the court may make such order as it considers necessary to give effect to those rights.
(2) An application shall not be made under clause (1) (d) where an application has been madeunder section 24.
24. (1) Where a claimant claims a lien against an article under Part I (Possessory Liens) andrefuses to surrender possession of the article to its owner or any other person entitled to it andwhere one of the circumstances described in subsection (1.2) exists, the owner or other personlawfully entitled to the article may apply to the court in accordance with the procedure set out inthis section to have the dispute resolved and the article returned.
(1.1) Where a claimant claims a lien against an article under Part II (Non-Possessory Liens),where the person who has possession of the article refuses to surrender it to its owner or anyother person entitled to it and where one of the circumstances described in subsection (1.2)
exists, the owner or other person lawfully entitled to the article may apply to the court inaccordance with the procedure set out in this section to have the dispute resolved and the articlereturned.
(1.2) Subsection (1) or (1.1) applies if there is,
(a) a dispute concerning the amount of the lien of the lien claimant including any questionrelating to the quality of the repair, storage or storage and repair;
(b) in the case of a repair, a dispute concerning the amount of work that was authorized to bemade to the article; or
(c) a dispute concerning the right of the lien claimant to retain possession of the article.

the owner and any person referred to in subsection 15 (2) may redeem the article by paying theamount required to satisfy the lien.

(3) The application shall be in the required form and may include an offer of settlement.
(4) The applicant shall pay into court, or deposit security with the court in the amount of, the fullamount claimed by the respondent but where the applicant includes an offer of settlement in theapplication, the applicant shall pay into court the amount offered in settlement and shall pay intocourt, or deposit security with the court for, the balance of the full amount claimed by therespondent and payments and deposits under this subsection shall be made to the credit of theapplication.
(5) Where money is paid into court or a deposit is made with the court under subsection (4), theclerk or registrar of the court shall issue an initial certificate in the required form and under theseal of the court stating that the amount indicated therein, or security therefor, has been paid intoor posted with the court to the credit of the application, and where applicable, indicating theportion of that amount that is offered in settlement of the dispute.
(6) The applicant shall give the initial certificate to the respondent who, within three days ofreceiving the initial certificate, shall release the article described therein to the applicant unless,within the three day period, the respondent files with the court a notice of objection in therequired form.
(7) Where an objection has been filed with the court, the applicant may pay into court or postsecurity with the court, to the credit of the application, the additional amount claimed as owing inthe objection, and where the additional amount has been paid into court or the additional securityhas been posted, the clerk or registrar shall issue a final certificate in the required form and underthe seal of the court.
(8) The applicant shall give the final certificate to the respondent who, upon receiving the finalcertificate, shall release immediately the article described therein.
(9) Where the respondent does not release the article as required, the applicant may obtain fromthe clerk or registrar of the court, without notice to the respondent, a writ of seizure directing thesheriff or bailiff to seize the article and, upon receipt of the writ, the sheriff or bailiff shall seizethe article and return it to the applicant.
(10) Before obtaining a writ of seizure, the applicant shall file an affidavit with the clerk orregistrar of the court confirming that the respondent has not released the article as required.
(11) Where the respondent releases the article to the applicant in compliance with an initial orfinal certificate, or where the article is seized by a sheriff or bailiff under a writ of seizure, therespondent may demand a receipt in the required form to this effect, and upon presentation of thereceipt to the clerk or registrar of the court and signing a waiver of further claim in the required

(2) The application shall name, as the respondents, the lien claimant and, in the case of a nonpossessory lien, the person who has possession of the article.

(12) Where the respondent accepts the amount offered in settlement of the dispute, the clerk orregistrar of the court shall notify the applicant and upon request shall return to the applicant thebalance of the amount deposited into court and deliver up any security deposited by the applicantfor cancellation.
(13) Where the article is released to the applicant by the respondent or is seized by the sheriff orbailiff under subsection (9), the lien is discharged as a right against the article and becomesinstead a charge upon the amount paid into court or the security posted with the court, and wherethe respondent seeks to recover the full amount claimed by the respondent to be owing, therespondent may commence an action to recover that amount.
(14) The charge upon the money paid into court or the security posted with the court isdischarged ninety days after the article was returned to the applicant or seized unless, before theend of the ninety days, the respondent has accepted the applicant’s offer of settlement or hascommenced an action to recover the amount claimed.
(15) Upon the expiry of the ninety days referred to in subsection (14), the clerk or registrar of thecourt may return to the applicant the money paid into court and deliver up for cancellation anysecurity posted with the court if the applicant files with the clerk or registrar an affidavitconfirming that the respondent has neither accepted an offer of settlement nor commenced anaction to recover the money claimed.
(16) The respondent is liable for the costs of enforcing a writ of seizure and these costs shall beset off against the amount paid into court under this section.
25. An application under this Part may be brought in any court of appropriate monetaryjurisdiction.
28. (1) Where an article that is subject to a lien is in the lien claimant’s possession, the lienclaimant,
(a) shall use reasonable care in the custody and preservation of the article, unless a higherstandard of care is imposed by law; and
(b) unless otherwise agreed,
(i) shall keep the article identifiable, and
(ii) may create a security interest under the Personal Property Security Act in thearticle, but only upon terms that do not impair a right of redemption under thatAct or this Act.
(2) Unless otherwise agreed, a lien claimant is entitled to recover the commercially reasonableexpenses incurred in the custody, preservation and preparation for sale of an article that is subjectto a lien, including the cost of insurance and the payment of taxes or other charges incurred

form, the respondent shall be paid the portion of the amount paid into court that was offered insettlement of the dispute.

therefor, and the expenses are chargeable to and secured by the article and may be included bythe lien claimant in determining the amount required to satisfy the lien.

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
INTACT INSURANCE
Applicant
– and –
2229152 ONTARIO LIMITED o/a ROYAL WINDSOR
COLLISION CENTRE
RespondentREASONS FOR JUDGMENT
GRAY J.
Released: May 26, 2017

CITATION: Intact Insurance v. 2229152 Ontario Limited, 2017 ONSC 3282
COURT FILE NO.: 2169/17
DATE: 2017-05-26

