B E T W E E N:
TRACEY KANAK

Plaintiff )
Defendant )

- and DARRYL RIGGIN

Robert Rastorp and AndrewRogerson, for the Plaintiff

Julian Porter, Q.C. and MatthewDoak, for the Defendant

HEARD: November 21-25, 2016

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
MCSWEENEY J.
Overview:

[1]

Tracey Kanak took issue with her former manager Darryl Riggin about

what he said during a job reference. Specifically, she sued him for defamation.
The trial lasted five days.
The Position of the Parties

[2]

The Plaintiff, Tracey Kanak, alleges that the defendant, Darryl Riggin,

made the following statements about her:
a)

There was a lot of conflict between Ms. Kanak, her supervisor andother employees;

CITATION: Kanak v. Riggin, 2016 ONSC 2837
COURT FILE NO.: CV-13-3758-00
DATE: 20170518
ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

Ms. Kanak did not take directions well;

c)

Ms. Kanak is narrowly-focused;

d)

Ms. Kanak does not handle stress well; and

e)

He [Darryl Riggin] would not re-hire Ms. Kanak.

Ms. Kanak pleads that in making the statements, Mr. Riggin was

motivated by malice, spite and a desire to get revenge on her.

[4]

Darryl Riggin confirms that he was contacted to provide an oral reference

concerning Ms. Kanak.

He admits that he said he would not re-hire Ms. Kanak,

and further admits the “gist” of the other statements ascribed to him. He states,however, that the statements were made as part of a larger conversation inwhich he also spoke of Ms. Kanak’s strengths.

[5]

Mr.

Riggin pleads further

that the statements were made in an

employment reference, which is an occasion of qualified privilege. As such, theycannot be considered defamatory unless the plaintiff can prove malice. Mr.Riggin denies that he was motivated by malice. He pleads that he spoke in goodfaith, and that the statements he made accurately reflected his appraisal of Ms.Kanak’s skills as an employee under his supervision.

[6]

Ms. Kanak denies that qualified privilege applies, and that even if it does,

the privilege does not protect Mr. Riggin’s statements because he was motivated

[3]

b)

by malice. She states that he harboured a desire for revenge against her based

contradicted him or had shown him to be wrong.

[7]

Ms. Kanak pleaded her claim originally in slander and defamation, later

amending it to add claims based on the same facts. In the alternative, shepleaded breach of contract and the following torts: intentional interference withcontractual or economic relations; infliction of emotional distress; and invasion ofprivacy.

[8]

Mr. Riggin takes the position that the alternative pleadings are not

available to the plaintiff because they are based on the same facts as the originalclaim and are simply “dressed up” pleadings of defamation.
Uncontested Facts

[9]

Both the plaintiff and defendant testified at trial. The following facts were

either admitted or uncontested:
a. In May 2006, Ms. Kanak was hired at Atomic Energy of CanadaLimited (“AECL”) by Mr. Riggin. Ms. Kanak held the position ofSenior Cost Control Analyst.
b. She was employed at AECL from 2006 to 2011. During that time sheworked hard and received positive performance ratings and merit

on three events in the workplace in which she had embarrassed him,

based salary increases. During that time she was selected for aprestigious assignment to a project in South Korea.

supervisor who in turn reported to Mr. Riggin.
d. Ms. Kanak, along with other employees, was laid off in October 2011
when the corporate assets of AECL were sold to SNC Lavalin.
Between October 2011 and February 2013 she worked elsewhereand also upgraded her skills.
e. Ms. Kanak received a conditional offer of employment from BrucePower on February 4, 2013 in response to a job application she hadmade for

the position of

Financial Analyst.

Ms.

Kanak was

unemployed at the time of her application.
f. Ms. Kanak accepted Bruce Power’s conditional offer on February 12,2013.
g. One of the conditions of the offer of employment was positivereference checks.
h. A company called BackCheck performed reference interviews forBruce Power,

as well as general employment and education

verifications. Ms. Kanak passed all of the background checks whichwere

conducted

by

BackCheck.

BackCheck

concluded

its

investigation of Ms. Kanak on or about February 21, 2013.
i. One of the references provided by the plaintiff was out of the countryand unavailable at the time BackCheck conducted its investigation.

c. While the parties worked together at AECL, Ms. Kanak reported to a

Bruce Power subsequently requested an alternative reference fromMs. Kanak, who gave them the name of Robert Keeler.

of Bruce Power, telephoned Robert Keeler directly. Robert Keelersupplied a positive reference for Ms. Kanak. Robert Keeler also toldMs. Glazier that the defendant had more experience supervising Ms.Kanak than he had.
k. On or about March 19, 2013, Christa Glazier telephoned Mr. Rigginfor a reference about Ms. Kanak.
l. On March 22, 2013, Bruce Power revoked its conditional offer ofemployment to Ms. Kanak on the basis that she had “failed to meetthe conditions of employment.” Bruce Power subsequently advisedthat its revocation of the conditional offer of employment was basedon the negative employment reference it obtained from Mr. Riggin.
Defamation: the Legal Framework

[10]

The legal framework applicable to defamation alleged in the employment

context was recently summarized by Miller J. in Papp v. Stokes et al., 201765.
As indicated in Grant v. Torstar Corp. [2009] S.C.J. No. 61 at paragraphs28-30 :
28 A plaintiff in a defamation action is required to prove three things to obtainjudgment and an award of damages: (1) that the impugned words weredefamatory, in the sense that they would tend to lower the plaintiff's reputationin the eyes of a reasonable person; (2) that the words in fact referred to theplaintiff; and (3) that the words were published, meaning that they werecommunicated to at least one person other than the plaintiff. If these elementsare established on a balance of probabilities, falsity and damage are

j. Christa Glazier, an employee in the Human Resources department

29 If the plaintiff proves the required elements, the onus then shifts to thedefendant to advance a defence in order to escape liability.
30 Both statements of opinion and statements of fact may attract the defenceof privilege, depending on the occasion on which they were made. Some
"occasions", like Parliamentary and legal proceedings, are absolutelyprivileged. Others, like reference letters or credit reports, enjoy "qualified"
privilege, meaning that the privilege can be defeated by proof that thedefendant acted with malice: see Horrocks v. Lowe, [1975] A.C. 135 (H.L.).
The defences of absolute and qualified privilege reflect the fact that "commonconvenience and welfare of society" sometimes requires untrammelledcommunications: Toogood v. Spyring (1834), 1 C.M. & R. 181, 149 E. R.
1044, at p. 1050, per Parke B. The law acknowledges through recognition ofprivileged occasions that false and defamatory expression may sometimescontribute to desirable social ends.
66
In Korach v. Moore [1991] O.J. No. 1, the Court of Appeal indicated thatwhere qualified privilege is established, the onus rests on the plaintiff to showmalice. [All emphases added]

[11]

As described above, in order to make out her defamation claim, Ms.

Kanak has the onus of establishing that the statements were made, and that theywere defamatory of her. If the statements are found to be defamatory, the onusthen shifts to Mr. Riggin to establish a defence. In this case, the only defencepleaded is qualified privilege; the defendant did not plead justification. If qualifiedprivilege applies, the onus shifts back to Ms. Kanak to establish malice whichdefeats the privilege.

[12]

It is therefore necessary to determine the following:

presumed, though this rule has been subject to strong criticism: see, e.g., R.
A. Smolla, "Balancing Freedom of Expression and Protection of ReputationUnder Canada's Charter of Rights and Freedoms", in D. Schneiderman, ed.,Freedom of Expression and the Charter (1991), 272, at p. 282. (The onlyexception is that slander requires proof of special damages, unless theimpugned words were slanderous per se: R. E. Brown, The Law ofDefamation in Canada (2nd ed. (loose-leaf)), vol. 3, at pp. 25-2 and 25-3.) Theplaintiff is not required to show that the defendant intended to do harm, oreven that the defendant was careless. The tort is thus one of strict liability.

What did Mr. Riggin say about Ms. Kanak to Bruce Power?

b)

Were Mr. Riggin’s remarks defamatory?

c)

Were the remarks made on an occasion of qualified privilege?

d)

If the occasion was one of qualified privilege, is the privilege defeatedby malice?

e)

If no defamation is found, can Ms. Kanak pursue a remedy under thealternate causes of action?

Issue 1: What did Mr. Riggin say to Bruce Power about Ms. Kanak?

[13]

It is not disputed that the words pleaded in Ms. Kanak’s claim are taken

from notes made by Christa Glazier of Bruce Power, based on her conversationwith Mr. Riggin.

[14]

No one else took part in that conversation and Ms. Glazier was not called

to testify at trial. The only direct evidence of the content of the conversation wasthe testimony of the defendant.

[15]

Mr. Riggin testified as follows: he received a “cold call” from Ms. Glazier

asking him for a reference for Tracey Kanak. He knew Ms. Glazier. It was notunusual for him to receive reference requests. For example, he had previouslyprovided “cold call” references where a prospective employer was looking recruitsomeone with a certain skill set, or where an offer of employment had alreadybeen made. Ms. Glazer did not tell him that Bruce Power had made a conditional

a)

offer to Ms. Kanak, nor that she was calling specifically about Ms. Kanak’s

Alleged Statements Re: Conflict with Others, Taking Direction and HandlingStress

[16]

Mr. Riggin confirmed that he made the following comments regarding Ms.

Kanak: (1) there was a lot of conflict between Ms. Kanak, her supervisor andother employees; (2) Ms. Kanak did not take directions well; and (3) Ms. Kanakdoes not handle stress well.

[17]

I

therefore

find

that

the

statements

ascribed

to

Mr.

Riggin

at

subparagraphs 11(a), (b) and (d) of the Statement of Claim are proven.
Allegation that the Plaintiff is Narrowly-Focused

[18]

With respect to the allegation that Ms. Kanak is “narrowly-focused,” Mr.

Riggin testified that he did not use those words in the reference. In the absenceof evidence from Ms. Glazier to the contrary, and given Mr. Riggin’s admissionswith respect to the other statements pleaded, I accept his evidence. I find that thestatement alleged at subparagraph 11(c) of the statement of claim is not proven.
Allegation that the Defendant Stated He Would Not Hire Plaintiff Again

[19]

Mr. Riggin testified that when asked by Ms. Glazier whether he would

hire the plaintiff again, he did not say only “no,” as alleged in the claim. Rather, in

suitability for a Financial Analyst position.

answering her question, he distinguished between Mr. Kanak’s skills and

“individual contributor” in a finance role.

He told Ms. Glazier that he would not

hire the plaintiff in a project controls role, but that he would hire her for a financerole as an individual contributor.

[20]

This distinction was also made by Mr. Riggin to Ms. Kanak directly when

she called him after she learned she had not gotten the Bruce Power job. Theplaintiff testified that Mr. Riggin told her in that conversation that he would nothire her as a project planner, but would hire her in an autonomous financialposition, as that is where she would “shine.”

[21]

On the evidence before me, I accept that Mr. Riggin told Ms. Glazier that

he would not re-hire the plaintiff in a project controls role, but would hire her in afinance role as an individual contributor.
The Words Proven

[22]

I find as a fact that Mr. Riggin made the following statements about Ms.

Kanak during his conversation with Ms. Glazier:
a)

There was a lot of conflict between Ms. Kanak, her supervisor andother employees;

b)

Ms. Kanak did not take directions well;

c)

Ms. Kanak does not handle stress well; and

suitability for a project controls position in a team environment and as an

He [Darryl Riggin] would not re-hire Ms. Kanak in a project controlsposition, but would hire her in an autonomous financial position.

Issue 2: Were Mr. Riggin’s remarks defamatory?

[23]

As described earlier, the test for defamation requires the plaintiff to

establish three things:

[24]

1)

That the impugned words were defamatory, in the sense that theywould tend to lower the plaintiff's reputation in the eyes of areasonable person;

2)

That the words in fact referred to the plaintiff; and

3)

That the words were published, meaning that theycommunicated to at least one person other than the plaintiff.

were

There is no dispute that (2) and (3) are established: the words were

specifically about the plaintiff; and the words were spoken by the defendant toChrista Glazier.

[25]

The remaining question is whether the words complained of, in their plain

meaning, would tend to lower Ms. Kanak’s reputation in the eyes of a reasonableperson. I find that the words spoken would have that effect. Difficulties in gettingalong with people, in coping with stress, and in taking directions are not positivedescriptors

of

workplace

behaviour.

Put

another

way,

all

are

generally

considered to be undesirable characteristics in an employee. I therefore concludethat the words spoken by Mr. Riggin were defamatory of the plaintiff.

d)

Issue 3: Were the remarks made on an occasion of qualified privilege?
The

defendant pleads that qualified privilege applies

because his

remarks were made as part of an employment reference. The employmentreference has been described as “a classic occasion of qualified privilege” : seeRoger D. McConchie & David Potts, Canadian Libel and Slander Actions
(Toronto: Irwin Law, 2004), at p. 379.

[27]

The social policy underpinning the protection of employment references

in this manner is clear: an employer must be able to give a job reference withcandour as to the strengths and weaknesses of an employee, without fear ofbeing sued in defamation for doing so. Without this protection, references wouldeither not be given, or would be given with such edited content as to render themat best unhelpful or at worst misleading to a prospective employer.

[28]

Ms. Kanak argues that qualified privilege cannot apply because she was

not working with Mr. Riggin at the time the reference was given. The plaintiffprovided no case law authority on this point.

[29]

I do not agree with this submission. If qualified privilege were so fettered

in its availability as a defence, individuals with a history of successiveemployments would only be able to turn to their most recent employer for acandid reference. Further, given that many individuals do not look for new workuntil they are no longer employed at their previous position, such a finding would

[26]

in practical terms prevent all but one of an applicant’s previous employers from

reference.

[30]

There is no dispute that the comments made by Mr. Riggin were made in

the context of a job reference call. I conclude that the statements were made onan occasion of qualified privilege.
Issue 4: Is the qualified privilege defeated by malice?

[31]

Malice may be either intrinsic to the words spoken, or established by
506 at 513, per Houlden J.A., dissenting but not on this point. In this case thedefamatory words are not so inflammatory that malice can be inferred from theirutterance. The plaintiff seeks to prove through extrinsic evidence that Mr. Rigginwas motivated by malice or spite in saying what he did about her.

[32]

It is settled law that the protection of qualified privilege is lost if the

plaintiff proves that the dominant motive for publishing the defamatory expressionis actual or express malice. Actual or express malice includes:
a)

Spite or ill will;

b)

Any indirect motive or ulterioroccasion;

purpose which conflicts with the

having the protection of the privilege necessary to give a full and candid

Speaking dishonestly, or in knowing or reckless disregard for thetruth.

(Roger D. McConchie & David Potts, Canadian Libel and Slander Actions,supra, pp. 405-406)

[33]

In considering the evidence, I note that Ms. Kanak does not allege that

Mr. Riggin exhibited malice toward her during the time they worked together. It iscommon ground that it was Mr. Riggin who hired Ms. Kanak, and that he was hermanager over a period of approximately five years with the exception of herposting to the project in South Korea.

[34]

With respect to Ms. Kanak’s application for the South Korea project, Mr.

Riggin testified that he supported her supervisor’s decision to give a performancerating to Ms. Kanak which was slightly higher than he otherwise felt wasaccurate. He did so because he did not want to impede her having theopportunity to go to South Korea. Mr. Riggin testified that he liked Ms. Kanak.
Ms. Kanak testified that she thought Mr. Riggin liked her.

[35]

Several co-workers (“peer witnesses”) called by Ms. Kanak testified with

respect to the dynamics in their part of the AECL workplace. Their testimonyestablished that overall the workplace was one in which there were severalstressors, in particular relating to the management style of Ms. Kanak’ssupervisor, through whom she reported to Mr. Riggin. Ms. Kanak and her peer

c)

witnesses gave extensive evidence with regard to the demanding management

[36]

The only suggestion of any negative behaviour from Mr. Riggin himself

regarding Ms. Kanak came from a peer witness, Wayne Roberts. Mr. Robertstestified that he heard Mr. Riggin refer to Ms. Kanak as “a nut” on one occasionin 2008. Mr. Riggin testified that he did not use that word about Ms. Kanak. Mr.Roberts admitted that he had been released from AECL by Mr. Riggin. Mr. Riggintestified as to the actions of Mr. Roberts which led to the decision to end hisemployment.

[37]

There was clearly a history of conflict between Mr. Roberts and Mr.

Riggin. I find that the allegation was not established on a balance of probabilitiesthat Mr. Riggin referred to the plaintiff as “a nut.”

[38]

Ms. Kanak asserts that, despite Mr. Riggin and herself getting along

seemingly well when they worked together, Mr. Riggin must have “stored upvenom to be used at a later date.” Ms. Kanak believes that this venom wasexpressed in the form of an untrue and malicious job reference.

[39]

Specifically, Ms. Kanak sought to establish that there were three

occasions over the years she worked at AECL which provided motivation for Mr.Riggin to be vindictive toward her. The following three topics she raised areconsidered below:

style of this supervisor and its detrimental impact on staff morale.

Their different views on the “Kronos” timekeeping software;

b)

Mr. Riggin referring to female staff as “girls”; and

c)

Ms. Kanak’s criticism of Mr. Riggin for giving her supervisor his ownoffice.

The Kronos Software

[40]

The Kronos timekeeping software was intended to help AECL track,

manage, and forecast project costs, specifically labour costs. The evidence of allwitnesses established that the effective implementation of this software requiredextensive data entry because its functionality was dependant on accurate datainput. The parties agreed that at one point, Ms. Kanak was assigned to try tomake Kronos work more effectively, and that she did a very good job of doing so.

[41]

Despite Ms.

Kanak’s and others’

best efforts, upper management

ultimately discontinued the use of Kronos as the resources it consumed were outof proportion to the benefit it provided as a cost control tool.

[42]

It was Ms. Kanak’s contention that the cancellation of Kronos was

perceived by Mr. Riggin as a criticism of him and one for which he held herresponsible.

[43]

Mr. Riggin’s evidence on this issue was that “Kronos was a huge

headache that gave us nothing in return.” He testified that when the decision was

a)

made to discontinue its use, “I was glad to be rid of Kronos.” His evidence about

[44]

I find that the evidence does not establish that the cancellation of Kronos

left Mr. Riggin with malicious or spiteful feelings towards Ms. Kanak.
Incident where Female Staff were called “the Girls”

[45]

Ms. Kanak testified to an occasion on which she spoke to Mr. Riggin

about the terminology he used for addressing two female staff members. Shehad heard him refer to them as “the girls.”

[46]

Both she and Mr. Riggin agree that this conversation took place, and that

after she expressed her concern, Mr. Riggin used more respectful terminology torefer to those female staff. Ms. Kanak speculated that her criticism of Mr. Rigginon this occasion could have been the reason for him to begin to harbour spiteand vindictiveness towards her.

[47]

Testifying on this point, Mr. Riggin offered the explanation that he had

been calling the two particular female staff “the girls” because he had knowneach of them since they were children as he knew their parents: he therefore stillsaw them as “girls.” Nonetheless, he conceded that Ms. Kanak was appropriateto correct him and that he did correct his language after she spoke to him.

Kronos was supported by Mr. Robert Keeler, a witness called by the plaintiff.

[48]

The evidence on this point does not establish that this small workplace

this interaction, developed spite or ill will against the plaintiff.
The Plaintiff’s Criticism of the Defendant for Giving her Supervisor his OwnOffice

[49]

The plaintiff testified that Mr. Riggin may have developed spite or ill will

toward her due to an incident in which she raised her voice in front of hercolleagues and criticized Mr. Riggin for giving a separate office to her supervisor.
She agreed that she communicated loudly words to the effect, “why would anydecent manager reward bad behaviour by giving a manager his own office?”

[50]

The parties agree that after Ms. Kanak’s outburst, which was overheard

by others, Mr. Riggin asked her to come and speak to him in his office. In thatmeeting he told her that it was inappropriate that she express herself in theworkplace in that fashion. The parties differ as to the specific words spoken byMr. Riggin, but they agree that he was critical of her outburst and that Ms. Kanakapologized to him for it. In her testimony, Ms. Kanak conceded that she was “outof line.” With respect to this occasion, Mr. Riggin expressed understanding forMs. Kanak’s actions. He testified that from his perspective “Tracey was ventingfrustration that I gave [the supervisor] an office rewarding his bad behavior asshe saw it.”

incident was other than it appeared. I do not find that Mr. Riggin, as a result of

[51]

I accept the plaintiff’s position that the workplace environment was

would be assigned to his own office was difficult for Ms. Kanak and for hercolleagues to accept.

[52]

Mr. Riggin testified that his decision to move the supervisor to a separate

office was in fact part of his response to the complaints he received about thesupervisor including complaints from Mr. Kanak.

[53]

I find that the evidence does not establish that Ms. Kanak’s “venting

frustration” with respect to her supervisor being assigned his own office led orcontributed to Mr. Riggin developing a spite or ill-will toward her.
Defendant’s Knowledge of Job Offer from Bruce Power

[54]

Ms. Kanak argued that Mr. Riggin knew or should have known about the

financial analyst job offer from Bruce Power when he was called for a referenceby Ms. Glazier. It was therefore malicious, she argues, for him to criticize herproject control skills as that was not relevant to the reference he was being askedfor.

[55]

Mr. Riggin testified that he did not know that Bruce Power had already

offered Ms. Kanak a finance job at the time he spoke with Ms. Glazier. Theparties agree that in his conversation with Ms. Kanak after the reference call, Mr.

difficult under her particular supervisor. The announcement that the supervisor

Riggin was “shocked” to learn that the reference had been sought in respect of a

that Mr. Riggin was not told by Ms. Glazier either that a conditional offer ofemployment had already been made to Ms. Kanak, nor that the position offeredwas a finance role.
Credibility and Reliability of Defendant

[56]

Mr. Riggin’s testimony was careful and clear, and it explained the basis

for his assessment of Ms. Kanak. Mr. Riggin has over forty years’ experience inthe nuclear power industry. Specifically, he had worked in the area of projectcontrols starting with his first career position in 1974. This long experience in thearea informed his opinion of Ms. Kanak that “she needed more project controlsexperience.” He discussed the basis for this assessment and what he believes tobe the core competencies and experience which are required in order forsomeone to be ready for a project controls role.

[57]

In his testimony, Mr. Riggin also explained, with examples, the basis for

his view that Ms. Kanak has had difficulty getting along with her supervisor andothers in the workplace, and that she did not take directions or handle stresswell. As referenced earlier, he testified to the three specific occasions put forwardby Ms. Kanak. He also testified as to other observations, interactions and

finance position which had already been offered to her. I find on the evidence

incidents relating to Ms. Kanak, upon which the comments in the job reference

[58]

I found Mr. Riggin to be a credible witness on the following bases:
1.

he testified in a measured and clear manner;

2.

he was subjected to a very provoking cross-examination, duringwhich his assessment of the plaintiff did not vary;

3.

he readily admitted several facts which were favourable to Ms.Kanak, including the defamatory words;

4.

he was able to explain the basis for his views of Ms. Kanak’sweaknesses, and did so with reference to his experience andobservations of her in the workplace;

5.

he readily admitted that Ms. Kanak has strengths, and his overallassessment had both positive and negative components.

[59]

In giving his reference about Ms. Kanak, I find as fact that Mr. Riggin

spoke honestly and described what he believed to be the truth. He was neitherdishonest nor reckless in doing so.

[60]

My conclusion is consistent with the observations of the plaintiff’s witness

Robert Keeler. As Mr. Riggin’s direct supervisor, Mr. Keeler was not aware of Mr.

were based.

Riggin having any issues with Ms. Kanak and stated he was “perplexed that this

[61]

At the end of her testimony, Ms. Kanak stated with regard to Mr. Riggin:

“I don’t understand in any way, shape or form that he can feel that way aboutme.” It was clear that Ms. Kanak was still affected by Mr. Riggin’s view of her andhad difficulty accepting it. During her evidence she questioned Mr. Riggin’scompetence. At one point, in the context of his assessment of her suitability for aproject controls position she questioned “whether he had Alzheimer’s”. Therewas no basis in the evidence for such speculation regarding Mr. Riggin’s mentalhealth.

[62]

The record demonstrated that many of her employment references, to

use Mr. Keeler’s phrase, felt that Ms. Kanak was “walking on water.” Mr. Riggindid not. Based on the evidence Ms. Kanak called on her behalf, it appeared tome that she was effectively trying to prove that what Mr. Riggin said about hercould not possibly be his view, unless he were motivated by spite or

“had

Alzheimer’s.”
Conclusion Re: Defamation

[63]

I have considered the totality of the evidence adduced at trial. The

evidence does not establish malice on the part of the defendant. The plaintiff hastherefore failed to defeat the defence of qualified privilege.

case is here.” He described Mr. Riggin as doing a good job on a busy project.

[64]

As referenced earlier, the plaintiff pleads alternative causes of action.

The case law establishes that there is no absolute bar to a plaintiff claimingdamages for defamation and concurrently, or in the alternative, for other torts.
[15] It is common ground that there is no absolute bar to a plaintiff claimingdamages for defamation and concurrently or in the alternative damages for othertorts. At the same time, it is also undisputed that a claim for defamation cannotbe “dressed up” as another claim to evade the defences available in adefamation action.

[16] In consequence, the questions to be determined on this motion are whetherall of the pleaded causes of action are independent for whether they aresubsumed under the law of defamation. In other words, do all of the pleadedclaims rest on the impugned publications and do all of the damages claimedarise only as a result of those publications?
citing Avalon with approval at para. 74; Byrne v. Maas, 2007 CanLII 49483 (ON
SC) at para. 9; and Trizec Properties Inc. v. Citigroup Global Markets Inc., 2004
[65]

In this case the plaintiff has conceded that her alternative pleadings are

based on precisely the same allegations as the defamation. In this context, I find

Alternative Causes of Action

that the alternative causes of action are not independent. In other words, each of

the damages Ms. Kanak alleges; including loss of job opportunity, moving costsand psychological harm, arise from the various impacts on her of failing to obtainthe Bruce Power job.

[66]

Accordingly, I conclude that the alternative claims are not separately

actionable by Ms. Kanak. They are subsumed under the law of defamation, andare “dressed up” pleadings of defamation.

[67]

For the foregoing reasons, the plaintiff’s action is dismissed in its entirety.

Costs

[68]

The defendant is entitled to his costs. If the parties are unable to agree

on costs, they may exchange and file written submissions as to costs, not toexceed three pages exclusive of a Bill of Costs and any relevant offers to settle,no later than June 9, 2017.

___________________________
MCSWEENEY J.
Released:

May 18, 2017

her various claims for damages rests on the same impugned publication. All of

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B E T W E E N:
TRACEY KANAK
Plaintiff
- and DARRYL RIGGIN
Respondent

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

MCSWEENEY J

Released:

May 18, 2017

CITATION: Kanak v. Riggin, 2016 ONSC 2837
COURT FILE NO.: CV-13-3758-00
DATE: 20170518

