CITATION: Ki Ho Kim v. Toronto Police Services Board, 2017 ONSC 2991
COURT FILE NO.: CV-10-394969
DATE: 20170516

RE:

Ki Ho Kim, PlaintiffAND:
The Toronto Police Services Board, Defendant

BEFORE:

Mr. Justice Stephen Firestone

COUNSEL:

Heather Hogan for the Public Guardian and Trustee, Litigation Guardian for KiHo Kim

HEARD:

In WritingENDORSEMENT

[1]
The Public Guardian and Trustee (PGT), as litigation guardian for the plaintiff, Ki HoKim (“Kim”), brings this motion in writing for court approval of the proposed settlement of thisaction on the basis that it be dismissed without costs.

[2]
Kim opposes the proposed settlement and takes the position that he is not, or is no longer,a party under disability and therefore does not require a litigation guardian in order to continuewith this action.

[3]
Rule 7.01 (1) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194 (“the Rules”) statesthat “unless the court orders or a statute provides otherwise, a proceeding shall be commenced,continued or defended on behalf of a party under disability by a litigation guardian”.

[4]
Disability is defined under Rule 1.03(b). It provides that “disability” where used inrespect of a person, means that the person is, (a) a minor, (b) mentally incapable within themeaning of section 6 or 45 of the Substitute Decisions Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 30 in respect ofan issue in the proceeding, whether the person has a guardian or not, or (c) an absentee within themeaning of the Absentees Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. A.3.

[5]
In Kavuru (Litigation guardian of) v. Heselden, 2014 ONSC 6718, 2014 CarswellOnt1618 (Div. Ct.) at para. 9, the Court confirmed the principle that once a finding of disability ismade, and a litigation guardian has been appointed, it becomes the duty of the litigation guardianto handle the litigation:

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

- Page 2 [It] is important to remember what the role of a litigation guardian is. It is aperson who is appointed to deal with a piece of litigation that the party cannotdeal with on his or her own because that person suffers from a disability.
At para. 12 the court goes on to state:
It was entirely within the authority of the PGT, in its role as litigation guardian, toagree to a settlement of these actions. It then fell to the court to determine whetherthose settlements ought to be approved. I accept that it is within the discretion ofthe judge hearing the approval motion to take into account any submissions thatthe person under a disability might wish to make regarding the proposedsettlement, but it must be remembered that the person under disability no longercontrols the litigation. That responsibility is vested in the litigation guardian.

[7]
On December 17, 2012, Dr. Hai R. Kim, M.D.; F.R.C.P. (C) Consultant Psychiatrist &
Psychotherapist rendered his opinion regarding Kim’s capacity. Dr. Kim found that Kim was aparty under disability as that term is defined under the Substitute Decisions Act and that herequired a litigation guardian to continue the proceedings.

[8]
Based in part on Dr. Kim’s psychiatric assessment, on November 4, 2013, MasterGraham found that the plaintiff was mentally incapable within the meaning of s. 6 of theSubstitute Decisions Act in respect of the issues in this action and ordered that the PGT beappointed litigation guardian for him.

[9]
The plaintiff’s appeal of Master Graham’s decision dated November 4, 2013 wasdismissed by Justice G.A. Hainey on July 8, 2014. The plaintiff’s subsequent motion for leave toappeal Justice Hainey’s decision was dismissed by the Divisional Court on December 5, 2014.

[10] Notwithstanding this procedural history, the plaintiff has delivered motion materialsseeking an order setting aside the order of Master Graham dated November 4, 2013 on the basisthat Mr. Kim is not a party under disability.

[11] On November 9, 2015, I directed that I be provided with a copy of the capacityassessment report of Dr. Venera Bruto, Ph.D.; C. Psych. which was commissioned by Kim. Thatreport concluded that Kim is mentally incapable and requires a litigation guardian.

[12]

Dr. Bruto, in his report under concluding comments states in part:
It is my opinion, that in the absence of a litigation guardian, Mr. Kim would likelycontinue to use the legal system and societal processes to battle those whodisagree with his opinions and appeared to him to disagree with his interpretationof events and circumstances in these cases. At no time during our discussion, doeshe ever consider the possibility that he might be in error to any degree or on anyissue under consideration…

[6]

- Page 3 -

It is noteworthy that English is Kim’s second language. Although not likelyinvalidating the present findings [given the nature of Mr. Kim’s responses andefforts taken to ensure comprehension], it cannot be definitely ruled out thatpossible difficulties in Mr. Kim’s English fluency or comprehension may haveimpacted Mr. Kim’s ability to discuss more complex nuanced issues [e.g. errors inlaw]…
[I]n no circumstance, were statements of uncertain meaning relied upon, in thepresent assessment, to arrive at the finding of incapacity…
[I]f questions remain regarding Mr. Kim’s current decisional capacity, and it isconsidered appropriate, a 3rd capacity assessment conducted by a Korean speakingassessor might be considered.

[13] Given that Kim continued to contest the issue of capacity, I ordered by way ofendorsement dated April 15, 2016 that pursuant to s. 105 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. C.43 Kim undergo a further capacity assessment to be conducted by a Korean speakingcertified capacity assessor or in the alternative that a further capacity assessment take place withthe assistance of a Korean speaking interpreter.

[14] In my endorsement dated November 10, 2016, I ordered that no further steps would betaken by the court regarding any motions filed in this matter until this further capacity report wasreceived.

[15] Dr. Graham Turrall, a designated capacity assessor, was retained on October 11, 2016 toconduct the capacity assessment. On March 24, 2017 Dr. Turrall delivered his report to the PGT.
Based on four assessment interviews and clinical examinations, Dr. Turrall concluded that Kimwas incapable. In his report he states as follows:
[T]he deficits prevent him from understanding and appreciating the relevantinformation in his decision-making and appreciating the probable consequencesof his decisions, or lack of decisions he chooses to make with respect to the legalactions that he has initiated.

[16] Kim has been found to be a party under disability as defined in Rule 1.03 regarding thisproceeding. As a result Kim, pursuant to Rule 7.01 has no standing independent of his litigationguardian, the PGT, to continue the proceeding, which includes the bringing of any motionsindependent of his litigation guardian.

[17] In addition, the plaintiff’s prior motion for leave to appeal Justice Hainey’s decision ofJuly 8, 2014 was dismissed by the Divisional Court. In accordance with Rule 7.01 and based on

It is also my opinion that he is at risk of continuing to accrue multiple claims,complaints and the associated costs. At no time does he consider or appreciate thefinancial implications for him of potentially losing so many legal claims…

- Page 4 -

[18] The requirement for court approval is set forth in Rule 7.08(1). This rule provides that
“no settlement of a claim made by or against a person under disability, whether or not aproceeding has been commenced in respect of the claim, is binding on the person without theapproval of a judge.”

[19] I have reviewed the complete evidentiary record. The record provides me with theevidence required to make a meaningful assessment of the proposed settlement.

[20] This action commenced against the Toronto Police Services Board arises from aninvestigation conducted by the Toronto Police Service (“Toronto Police”) in response to Kim’scomplaints of an assault by third parties which took place on January 16, 2008.

[21] Based on the evidentiary record, I am satisfied that Kim has no viable cause of actionagainst the Toronto Police based on the factual matrix of this case as it applies to the actionstaken by the defendant in relation to an assault which took place on January 16, 2008 and that adismissal of the claim on a without cost basis is in Kim’s best interests.

[22] I therefore order that this action be dismissed without costs. Given the ongoing litigationin a related proceeding, I order under s. 137(2) of the Courts of Justice Act that all motionmaterial delivered by the PGT and Kim in relation to court approval of the proposed settlementof this action be, subject to further order of the court, sealed and not form part of the publicrecord in order to protect solicitor-client privilege and confidentiality. The PGT is to forthwithforward a copy of this endorsement to Kim. I do not remain seized of any further motions in thisaction.

Firestone J.

Date: May 16, 2017

the principle of res judicata, Kim’s current motion to set aside the order of Master Graham datedNovember 4, 2013 is not properly constituted and is dismissed.

