CITATION: Ki Ho Kim v. 260 Wellesley Residences Inc., 2017 ONSC 2985
COURT FILE NO.: CV-12-451035
DATE: 20170516

RE:

Ki Ho Kim, PlaintiffAND:
260 Wellesley Residences Inc. et al., Defendants

BEFORE:

Mr. Justice Stephen Firestone

COUNSEL: Heather Hogan, for the Public Guardian and Trustee, Litigation Guardian for KiHo KimHEARD:

In WritingENDORSEMENT

[1]
The Public Guardian and Trustee, as litigation guardian for the plaintiff, Ki Ho Kim
(“Kim”), brings this motion in writing for court approval of the proposed settlement of thisaction in the amount of $10,000.

[2]
Kim opposes the proposed settlements and takes the position that he is not, or is nolonger, a party under disability and therefore does not require a litigation guardian in order tocontinue with these actions.

[3]
Rule 7.01(1) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194 (the “Rules”) statesthat “unless the court orders or a statute provides otherwise, a proceeding shall be commenced,continued or defended on behalf of a party under disability by a litigation guardian”.

[4]
Disability is defined under Rule 1.03(b). It provides that “disability” where used inrespect of a person, means that the person is, (a) a minor, (b) mentally incapable within themeaning of section 6 or 45 of the Substitute Decisions Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 30 in respect ofan issue in the proceeding, whether the person has a guardian or not, or (c) an absentee within themeaning of the Absentees Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. A.3.

[5]
In Kavuru (Litigation guardian of) v. Heselden, 2014 ONSC 6718, 2014 CarswellOnt1618 (Div. Ct.), at para. 9, the Court confirmed the principle that once a finding of disability ismade, and a litigation guardian has been appointed, it becomes the duty of the litigation guardianto handle the litigation:

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

- Page 2 [It] is important to remember what the role of the litigation guardian is. It is aperson who is appointed to deal with a piece of litigation that the party cannotdeal with on his or her own because that person suffers from a disability.
At para. 12 the court goes on to state:
It was entirely within the authority of the PGT, in its role as litigation guardian, toagree to a settlement of these actions. It then fell to the court to determine whetherthose settlements ought to be approved. I accept that it is within the discretion ofthe judge hearing the approval motion to take into account any submissions thatthe person under a disability might wish to make regarding the proposedsettlement, but it must be remembered that the person under a disability no longercontrols the litigation. That responsibility is vested in the litigation guardian.

[7]
On December 17, 2012, Dr. Hai R. Kim, M.D.; F.R.C.P. (C) Consultant Psychiatrist &
Psychotherapist rendered his opinion regarding Kim’s capacity. Dr. Kim found that Kim was aparty under disability as that term is defined under the Substitute Decisions Act and that herequired a litigation guardian to continue the proceedings.

[8]
Based in part on Dr. Kim’s psychiatric assessment, Master Graham on November 4, 2013
found that the plaintiff is mentally incapable within the meaning of s. 6 of the SubstituteDecisions Act in respect of the issues in this action and ordered that the PGT be appointedlitigation guardian for him.

[9]
The plaintiff’s appeal of Master Graham’s decision dated November 4, 2013 wasdismissed by Justice G.A. Hainey on July 8, 2014. The plaintiff’s subsequent motion for leave toappeal Justice Hainey’s decision was dismissed by the Divisional Court on December 5, 2014.

[10] Notwithstanding this procedural history, the plaintiff has delivered motion materialseeking an order setting aside the order of Master Graham dated November 4, 2013 on the basisthat Mr. Kim is not a party under disability.

[11] On November 9, 2015, I directed that I be provided with a copy of the capacityassessment report of Dr. Venera Bruto, Ph.D.; C. Psych. which had been commissioned by Kim.
That report concluded that Kim is mentally incapable and requires a litigation guardian.

[12]

Dr. Bruto, in his report under concluding comments states in part:
It is my opinion, that in the absence of a litigation guardian, Mr. Kim would likelycontinue to use the legal system and societal processes to battle those whodisagree with his opinions and appeared to him to disagree with his interpretationof events and circumstances in these cases. At no time during our discussion, doeshe ever consider the possibility that he might be in error to any degree or on anyissue under consideration…

[6]

- Page 3 -

It is noteworthy that English is Kim’s second language. Although not likelyinvalidating the present findings [given the nature of Mr. Kim’s responses andefforts taken to ensure comprehension], it cannot be definitely ruled out thatpossible difficulties in Mr. Kim’s English fluency or comprehension may haveimpacted Mr. Kim’s ability to discuss more complex nuanced issues [e.g. errors inlaw]…
[I]n no circumstance, were statements of uncertain meaning relied upon, in thepresent assessment, to arrive at the finding of incapacity…
[I]f questions remain regarding Mr. Kim’s current decisional capacity, and it isconsidered appropriate, a 3rd capacity assessment conducted by a Korean speakingassessor might be considered.

[13] Given that Kim continued to contest the issue of capacity, I ordered way of endorsementdated April 15, 2016, that pursuant to s. 105 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43,Kim undergo a further capacity assessment to be conducted by a Korean speaking certifiedcapacity assessor or in the alternative that a further capacity assessment take place with theassistance of a Korean speaking interpreter.

[14] In my endorsement dated November 10, 2016, I ordered that no further steps would betaken by the court regarding any motions filed in this matter until the further capacity report wasreceived.

[15] Dr. Graham Turrall, a designated capacity assessor, was retained on October 11, 2016 toconduct the capacity assessment. On March 24, 2017 Dr. Turrall delivered his report to the PGT.
Based on four assessment interviews and clinical examinations, Dr. Turrall concluded that Kimwas incapable. In his report he states as follows:
[T]he deficits prevent him from understanding and appreciating the relevantinformation in his decision-making and appreciating the probable consequences ofhis decisions, or lack of decisions he chooses to make with respect to the legalactions that he has initiated.

[16] Kim has been found to be a party under disability as defined in Rule 1.03 regarding thisproceeding. As a result Kim, pursuant to Rule 7.01 has no standing independent of his litigationguardian, the PGT, to continue the proceeding, which includes the bringing of any motionsindependent of his litigation guardian.

[17] In addition, the plaintiff’s prior motion for leave to appeal Justice Hainey’s decision ofJuly 8, 2014 was dismissed by the Divisional Court. In accordance with Rule 7.01 and based on

It is also my opinion that he is at risk of continuing to accrue multiple claims,complaints and the associated costs. At no time does he consider or appreciate thefinancial implications for him of potentially losing so many legal claims…

- Page 4 -

[18] The requirement for court approval is set forth in Rule 7.08(1). This rule provides that
“no settlement of a claim made by or against a person under disability, whether or not aproceeding has been commenced in respect of the claim, is binding on the person without theapproval of a judge.”

[19] I have reviewed the complete evidentiary record. The record provides me with theevidence required to make a meaningful assessment of the proposed settlement.

[20] This action arises with respect to injuries sustained by Kim in a slip and fall incidentwhich took place on January 19, 2011 on the sidewalk near the intersection of James Street andOntario Street in the city of Toronto. At that time, Kim fell on his right buttock and right hand.
Following the fall, he attended at the St. Michaels Hospital emergency department. The notesfrom the emergency report indicate that Kim walked without difficulty. Kim has had ongoingcomplaints of hip pain. The hospital record notes a pre-existing history of chronic back pain.

[21] Kim underwent a lumbar spine x-ray on February 2, 2011. The report noted that there isdegenerative change at the L4-5 joints. A whole body scan conducted February 16, 2011
indicated no evidence of recent occult fracture.

[22] On February 26, 2011 an MRI of the right hip was conducted. The report found “minimalright hip effusion, not significant” and “no evidence of fracture or edema”. The report concludesthat Mr. Kim has some age-related right hip changes but there were no other significant findings.

[23] The subsequent x-ray of Kim’s right hip dated March 10, 2011 detected no clear fractureline. The radiologist involved subsequently confirmed that there was no evidence of fracture.
The scan conducted February 16 2012 states that “[T]the sacrum and coccyx, S.I. joints all looknormal.” The subsequent MRI dated May 3, 2012 found “[N]o evidence of avascular necrosis ofthe right femoral head or insufficiently fracture.”

[24] Kim does not have any source of income other than ODSP benefits. He was on welfarefrom 1994 to 1997 at which time he applied and was in receipt of ODSP.

[25] Based on the complete factual matrix and evidentiary record as it applies to both liabilityand damages I am satisfied that the proposed settlement is fair and reasonable, that it representsfair compensation, and it is in Kim’s best interests.

[26] I approve the proposed settlement for the sum of $10,000 such sum which is to be paid tothe Accountant of the Superior Court of Justice to the credit of Ki Ho Kim until such furtherorder of the court.

[27] Any cost orders against Kim as a result of previous interlocutory steps and appeals in thisaction are set aside. Given the ongoing litigation in a related proceeding, I order under section137(2) of the Courts of Justice Act that all motion material delivered by the PGT and Kim in

the principle of res judicata, Kim’s current motion to set aside the order of Master Graham datedNovember 4, 2013 is not properly constituted and is dismissed.

- Page 5 -

relation to court approval of the proposed settlement of this action be, subject to further order ofthe court, sealed and not form part of the public record in order to protect solicitor-clientprivilege and confidentiality.

- Page 6 -

Firestone J.

Date: May 16, 2017

[28] Judgment is to issue in accordance with the original signed by me. The PGT is toforthwith forward a copy of this endorsement to Kim. I do not remain seized of any furthermotions in this action.

