CITATION: KM v. Marson, 2017 ONSC 2972
COURT FILE NO.: CV-08-0283-00
DATE: 2017 May 15

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

KM
Plaintiff )
– and –
ROBERT TERRANCE MARSON and THE )
HASTINGS AND PRINCE EDWARD
DISTRICT SCHOOL BOARD
Defendants

Robert J. Reynolds, for the Plaintiff

S. Wayne Morris, for the Defendant,The Hastings and Prince Edward DistrictSchool Board

HEARD at BELLEVILLE: May 1, 2017

MACLEOD-BELIVEAU J.
MOTION DECISION

[1] The plaintiff brings this motion seeking an order permitting plaintiff’s counsel to refer in hisclosing argument and submissions at trial to the audio transcription files and the relatedsummaries generated by the court reporting system in regard to the evidence given at trial,and to provide copies of the audio transcription files and summaries to defendant’s counseland to me, the trial judge, rather than referring to a certified transcript of the evidence.
The Issue:

[2] The issue is whether or not the court should grant the request, after full consideration ofOntario Regulation 158/03 under the Evidence Act, s. 136 of the Courts of Justice Act, theSuperior Court of Justice Policy on the release of digital recordings, and the signedundertaking of counsel to the Court for access to digital court recordings, which governspermitted and prohibited uses of such recordings.
Result:

[3] The motion is dismissed. Transcripts certified by an authorized transcriptionist for Ontarioare required for this purpose. Costs are reserved to be determined after the trial.

ONTARIO

[4] The position of the plaintiff is that the trial judge has jurisdiction to control the trial processand that the order should be granted. Counsel for the plaintiff was required to execute anundertaking in order to secure the audio transcription files and related summaries generatedby the court reporter during the evidence given at trial. Counsel for the plaintiff reviewed thetranscription files in the preparation of his closing argument, which was required to be inwriting, but delivered orally, with detailed references to the evidence upon which the plaintiffrelies. His draft written argument is footnoted to relevant passages in the evidence, so as toallow defendant’s counsel and myself, as the trial judge, to check the argument andevidentiary references of the plaintiff against the evidence heard at trial on the CD audiorecording.

[5] The defendant’s position is that the order should not be granted and defendant’s counselrefused to consent to the order sought. The concerns of the defendant were: that therecordings had not been transcribed by an authorized transcriptionist for Ontario; that therewill be problems with deciphering what is being said by the witness; all parties and the trialjudge will be required to engage in an extensive review of the recordings, either before,during or after the submissions given in court that is both time consuming and costly; and thelack of a transcript will be problematic at the Court of Appeal, if this matter is appealed.
Further, it is the defendant’s position that this is why we have certified court reporters andthat transcripts are required to be certified by the court reporter as to what was actually saidby the witness, to be relied upon in court.
Analysis:

[6] Section 136 of the Courts of Justice Act contains a general prohibition from making an audiorecording at a court hearing. Contravention of this section is an offence as set out in s. 136
(4) and is punishable by a fine of not more than $25,000 or to imprisonment for a term of notmore than six months, or to both. Certain exceptions apply if authorized by a judge, includinga recording by counsel for the sole purpose of supplementing or replacing their hand writtennotes. Counsel rarely request permission under s. 136 of the Courts of Justice Act to maketheir own recording, as digital recordings are now available to them for this purpose for a feefrom the court office upon the signing of an undertaking as to their permitted use.

[7] The court reporting system in operation at the Belleville courthouse, and in other courthousesthroughout Ontario, includes the capacity to generate a daily audio transcription of theevidence, accompanied by PDF files made by the typing of notes during the evidence by thecourt reporter which summarize the evidence, and contain time bullets that are linked to theaudio files, allowing the reader to find specific witnesses and passages in the evidence. Thephysical form of this information is a CD of the daily audio recording which has imbedded init, the court reporter’s daily summary of the evidence.

[8] The integrity of the court record is a serious matter to ensure public confidence in theadministration of justice and must be protected by the court. The court is required however,to balance the integrity of the court record with access to justice in a time when digital

Position of the Parties:

[9] The combined objective is accomplished by Regulations, a Policy Statement of the SuperiorCourt of Justice, the completion and signing of an “Undertaking to the Court for Access toDigital Court Recordings”, and the payment of the prescribed fee.

[10] Certification of recordings and transcripts is provided for in Ontario Regulation 158/03
under the Evidence Act as follows:
Evidence ActONTARIO REGULATION 158/03
CERTIFICATION OF RECORDINGS AND TRANSCRIPTS
Application1. This Regulation applies to proceedings in the Court of Appeal, the SuperiorCourt of Justice and the Ontario Court of Justice.
Definition2. In this Regulation, “approved device” means a device for recording sound of atype approved by the Attorney General, as mentioned in subsection 5 (1) of theAct.
Certification of recordings3. (1) A recording made under subsection 5 (1) of the Act by means of anapproved device shall be certified in Form 1 by a person who, is authorized torecord evidence and proceedings under subsection 5 (1) of the Act; and is incharge of the approved device while the recording is being made.
(2) The certificate in Form 1 is admissible in evidence and is proof, in the absenceof evidence to the contrary, that the recording is a recording of evidence andproceedings in the proceeding.
Certification of transcripts4. (1) A transcript made under subsection 5 (2) of the Act from a recording madeunder subsection 5 (1) of the Act by means of an approved device shall becertified in Form 2 by the person who transcribes the recording.
(2) The person who transcribes the recording and certifies the transcript shall be aperson who is trained and qualified to transcribe recordings and is a member of aclass of persons who are authorized to do so by the Attorney General, but neednot be the same person who is in charge of the approved device while therecording is being made.

technology is available to access court proceedings and audio recordings by interestedpersons.

(4) The certificate in Form 2 has the status referred to in subsection (3), withrespect to admissibility and proof, without being accompanied by a certificate inForm 1 relating to the certified recording that is identified in the certificate inForm 2.
(5) When a certificate in Form 2 is completed, nothing further is required tocertify the transcript.
Forms5. In this Regulation, when a form is referred to by number, the reference is to theform with that number that is described in the Table of Forms at the end of thisRegulation and is available on the Internet through www.ontariocourtforms.on.ca.

[11] Section 3 of Regulation 158/03 provides for the certification of the recording in Form 1
which is admissible in evidence and is proof that the recording is a recording of the evidenceand proceedings in the proceeding.

[12] The Superior Court of Justice has established a policy on the release of digital courtrecordings to interested persons as follows:

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
POLICY ON THE RELEASE OF DIGITAL COURT
RECORDINGS
Members of the public, counsel, litigants, accused or the media may obtain copiesof digital court recordings (hereinafter referred to as “digital recordings”) madefrom Digital Recording Devices (DRDs) of matters heard in open court, inaccordance with the requirements of this policy. The copies of digital courtrecordings will include annotations.
The release of digital recordings will be at the Court’s discretion and the use of alldigital recordings will be subject to any court order and any common law orstatutory restriction on publication applicable to the particular proceeding.

(3) The certificate in Form 2 is admissible in evidence and is proof, in the absenceof evidence to the contrary, that the transcript is a transcript of the certifiedrecording of evidence and proceedings in the proceeding that is identified in thecertificate in Form 2.

Unless the policy provides otherwise, all persons must execute an undertakingwith the Court to access the digital recordings. The undertaking prescribes theway in which the digital recording is to be used and the terms and conditionsunder which the digital recording is being provided. All digital recordings aresubject to the prohibition set out in section 136 of the Courts of Justice Act, whichprohibits the broadcast, reproduction and dissemination of audio recordings. Anyperson who contravenes s. 136 is guilty of an offence and subject to a penalty, inaccordance with s. 136(4) of the Courts of Justice Act.
This policy applies to the Superior Court of Justice in Ontario, but does not applyto the Small Claims Court.
Definitions:
1. For the purposes of this policy, “judge” means:
all judges, traditional masters, and case management masters of the SuperiorCourt of Justice.
Restrictions on Access to Digital Recordings from DRDs:
1. All copies or access to digital recordings are subject to any express order thepresiding judge may make. The presiding judge may expand or restrict access tothe digital recordings in any particular proceeding before him or her.
2. Unless a judge of the Superior Court of Justice orders otherwise, no digitalrecordings are available to anyone in the following proceedings:
a) in camera proceedings or any portion of a proceeding that is heard in camera;b) private or closed hearings (e.g. pursuant to ss. 45 or 151 of the Child andFamily Service Act);c) proceedings subject to a statutory, common law or court ordered restriction onthe provision of transcripts or digital recordings of the proceeding (e.g., pretrial conferences held in court with self-represented accused, pursuant to rule28.05(4) of the Criminal Proceedings Rules of the Superior Court of Justice
(Ontario), proceedings under the Youth Criminal Justice Act); and,d) case, settlement and trial management conferences pursuant to rule 17 of theFamily Law Rules.
Access to Digital Recordings from DRDs:
1) Counsel of RecordA counsel of record in a proceeding may obtain the digital recordings of thatproceeding upon completion of the “Undertaking of Counsel/Licensed Paralegalof Record” and payment of the prescribed fee.

2) Litigant or AccusedA litigant or accused in a proceeding may obtain the digital recordings of thatproceeding upon completion of the “Undertaking to the Court for Access toDigital Court Recordings” and payment of the prescribed fee.
3) The Mediaa) Members of the media identified on the “Joint Courts’ List of DesignatedMedia for Access to Digital Court Recordings” accessible on the SuperiorCourt of Justice website (http://www.ontariocourts.ca/en/media-list.htm) mayobtain the digital recordings upon completion of the “Undertaking to the Courtfor Access to Digital Court Recordings” and payment of the prescribed fee.
b) Members of the media who are not identified on the “Joint Courts’ List ofDesignated Media for Access to Digital Court Recordings” may make anapplication for an order in accordance with this policy authorizing him or herto obtain access to the digital recordings of the proceeding.
The applicant may obtain the digital recordings if he or she: (i) obtains a courtorder authorizing access, (ii) completes “Undertaking to the Court for Accessto Digital Court Recordings”, and (iii) pays the prescribed fee.
4) Members of the PublicMembers of the public may make an application for an order in accordance withthis policy authorizing him or her to obtain access to the digital recordings of theproceeding.
The applicant may obtain the digital recording if he or she: (i) obtains a courtorder authorizing access, (ii) completes the “Undertaking to the Court for Accessto Digital Court Recordings”, and (iii) pays the prescribed fee.
5) The Presiding Judge, Regional Senior Judge (RSJ) or Local AdministrativeJudge (LAJ)
a) Copies or access to digital recordings shall be provided, upon request, to thepresiding judge for the proceeding in which the digital recording wasprepared.

Persons attending on behalf of counsel of record may obtain the digital recordingif he or she: (i) provides a signed undertaking from counsel of record; (ii) signsthe authorization included in the “Undertaking of Counsel/Licensed Paralegal ofRecord”; and (iii) pays the prescribed fee.

c) Where a judge wishes to access a digital recording from a proceeding inwhich another judge presided, the judge shall obtain the consent of thepresiding judge to access the digital recording, subject to paragraph (d).
d) Where a judge determines that he or she can deal more effectively andefficiently with a case by accessing a digital recording from a previousproceeding before another judge, in the same case or a related case, the judgecan access the digital recording by obtaining permission from the presidingjudge, the RSJ, the LAJ, or his or her designate, unless it is in the interests ofjustice to dispense with such permission. In that event, access to the digitalrecording shall be provided to the judge upon request. After access isprovided, the judge who has obtained access shall notify the judge whopresided at the earlier proceeding, if that judge was not notified when theissues arose.
6) Court Services Division Staff and TranscriptionistsCopies or access to digital recordings shall be provided upon request at no chargeto the following:
a) Court Services Division Staff who require access in the course of theiremployment responsibilities; and,b) Transcriptionists who are authorized by Regulation 158/03 under the EvidenceAct and require access to transcribe court proceedings.
7) Named Administrative Bodies or OrganizationsRepresentatives of the bodies or organizations authorized pursuant to aMemorandum of Understanding with the Ministry of Attorney General to haveaccess to digital audio recordings may obtain digital court recordings of courtproceedings related directly to the matters under consideration by these bodies ororganizations, upon completion of the “Undertaking to the Court for Access toDigital Court Recordings”.
Hearing of the Application:
Applications regarding access to the digital recording for any ongoing proceedingwill be heard by the judge who is seized of the proceeding.

b) Copies or access to digital recordings shall be provided, upon request, to theRSJ or LAJ (or his or her designate), for administrative purposes, in theabsence of the presiding judge. The presiding judge will be notified thataccess or copies of the digital recording were made available to the RSJ orLAJ (or his or her designate).

Applications regarding access to the digital recording for any other type ofproceeding or for a proceeding that has concluded will be heard by the judge whopresided at the hearing.
Where the judge who presided at the hearing is not available to hear theapplication or where no particular judge is associated with the proceeding, theRSJ, LAJ (or his or her delegate) may hear the application. Applicants should beaware that, especially for proceedings that have concluded or proceedingsadjourned for a lengthy period of time, it may not always be possible to schedulean application before the appropriate judge on short notice because a judge mayhave many ongoing obligations in other proceedings.

[13] The policy requires counsel of record to sign an undertaking in the prescribed form. Theundertaking executed by plaintiff’s counsel contains a condition which, read literally,prohibits plaintiff’s counsel from disclosure of these materials to defendant’s counsel andeven to the trial judge. It is not disputed that these digital audio recordings are independentlyavailable to defendant’s counsel, upon signing the undertaking, and to the trial judge ifrequested.

[14]

The form of the undertaking to be signed by counsel of record is as follows:
Superior Court of Justice/Ontario Court of JusticeUndertaking of Counsel/Licensed Paralegal of Record to the Court forAccess to Digital Court Recordings1.

I,that:

(please print legibly), acknowledge

a. The digital recording is being provided to me for the purpose of:
i.

preparation in connection with the legal proceedings with respect to this case;and/or,

ii. replacing or supplementing notes of the legal proceedings with respect to thiscase.
b. Any other use of the digital recording is prohibited without an order from thepresiding judicial officer or a judicial officer of the Court.
2.

I understand and agree that the digital recording to be provided pursuant to thisrequest will be provided subject to the following terms and conditions:
a. I am legal counsel/licensed paralegal of record and I am a member in good standingof the Law Society of Upper Canada.
b. I have read and understand s.136 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.C.43,including that every person who contravenes this section is guilty of an offence andon conviction is liable to a fine of not more than $25,000 or to imprisonment for aterm of not more than six months, or to both.

Applications shall be brought in accordance with the procedural rules that governthe court proceeding.

c. Subject to section (f) below, I will not publish, broadcast, reproduce or otherwisedisseminate the digital recording, including any annotation in the audio file, in anyway.
i.

onto one or more computers under my direction and control, for my own use inthis case; or

ii. for the purpose of sharing an electronic copy of the file in accordance with section
(f) below.
e. Subject to section (f) below, I will not authorize, assist or permit anyone to publish,broadcast, reproduce or otherwise disseminate the digital recording, including anyannotation in the audio file, in any way.
f. I acknowledge that I may share an electronic copy of the digital recording with onlythose individuals enumerated below in (i) or (ii), and further that where suchindividuals are accessing the digital recording, it will be only for the purposes listed insection 1(a) and that I will ensure that those individuals are aware of, and complywith, all of the conditions set out within this undertaking:
i.

other lawyers, articling students or administrative support persons who areassisting me in this matter;

ii. an expert witness whom I have retained to assist me in this matter.
g. I acknowledge that I may allow my client to listen to the digital recording in mypresence or in the presence of someone from my firm, but my client will not beprovided with the digital recording or a copy of the digital recording.
h. If a witness exclusion order has been made in the proceeding, I will not disclose thecontents of the digital recording to any prospective witness who has not givenevidence.
i. I acknowledge that any notes, transcription or similar document that I produce (ordirect to be produced) using the digital recording is not a court transcript or a courtrecord, and I will not purport that it is a court transcript or a court record.
j. When the digital recording is not being used for the purpose permitted by theundertaking, I will keep the digital recording in a secure place where it cannot beaccessed by persons other than those persons listed in section (f) above.
k. I will safeguard the digital recording in accordance with my professional obligationsregarding client files.

[15]

The use of the audio recording as requested by plaintiff’s counsel in this case, is aprohibited use without an order from myself as the presiding trial judge. The request toallow this prohibited use of the audio recordings is denied.

[16]

To grant the order sought and to allow this otherwise prohibited use would createsignificant difficulties with deciphering what is being said by the witness. It would putthe court in the role of determining what was said and potentially hearing argument onwhat was said, if there was a disagreement between counsel.

[17]

It would require the parties, counsel and myself as the trial judge, to engage in anextensive review of the recordings, either before, during or after the trial submissionsgiven in court, that would be both time consuming and costly to the parties, in order to

d. I will not copy, save, upload or download the digital recording, except:

[18]

While a Certification of recordings in Form 1 as provided for in section 3 of Regulation158/03 pursuant to the Evidence Act may have some legitimate use, it does not equal orreplace a Certification of transcripts of the evidence in Form 2 as provided for in section4 of Regulation 158/03, certifying what was actually said in the proceedings.

[19]

The court has experienced, dedicated, professional and highly trained court reporterswhose expertise is to prepare a written record of what was said in a proceeding. The costof obtaining certified transcripts pales in comparison to the increased costs and trial timerequired to pursue and/or agree upon what was said by a witness during a proceeding, bycounsel and the trial judge in open court. Simply put, plaintiff’s counsel’s request isunworkable, inefficient, and time consuming when court resources are at a premium.

[20]

The evidentiary portion of the trial in this matter involved the hearing of very intensiveevidence over a ten day period between March 20, 2017 and March 31, 2017. Originally,submissions were to begin the week of April 3, 2017. At the conclusion of the evidence,it was agreed by counsel and at the invitation of the court, that more time was necessaryto allow counsel to properly prepare their closing arguments which had been directed tobe in writing, delivered orally, with detailed references to the evidence in support of theirpositions.

[21]

The trial was adjourned to May 8, 2017 for this purpose, with counsel to set their owntimetable within that period for the exchange of their written submissions. Plaintiff’scounsel delivered his closing argument to defendant’s counsel on April 18, 2017,omitting references to the audio recordings and the summaries of the evidence imbeddedin those recordings made by the court reporter. As there was no agreement betweencounsel about using the references to the audio recordings and summaries, this motionwas brought returnable May 1, 2017 before me to determine the issue.

[22]

I find the plaintiff’s objective in seeking this relief was twofold: firstly, to meet the timeconstraints he was facing for the delivery of his written argument to defendant’s counsel,and secondly, to comply with my directive that the closing submissions of counsel bedetailed as to references to the evidence in support of their respective positions.

[23]

Plaintiff’s counsel’s submissions were due before any certified transcripts could bereasonably obtained, even if they had been ordered and expedited. Defendant’s counselordered transcripts of his two expert witnesses Professor Charette and Dr. Silver, for thebenefit of his written submissions shortly after the evidence ended on March 31, 2017.

[24]

As I advised counsel at the hearing of this motion, I ordered transcripts of the entirety ofthe evidence shortly thereafter, for use by me ultimately in preparing my reasons fordecision, due to the complex nature of the evidence. At the time of the hearing of themotion, all the evidence had been transcribed except for the two expert witnesses of theplaintiff, Professor Carr and Dr. Singh, which would be completed by May 31, 2017.

verify and determine that references made by plaintiff’s counsel to the audio recordedevidence were accurate.

[25]

At the hearing of the motion, both counsel advised, upon learning for the first time thattranscripts were being prepared for the entirely of the trial, that they would be orderingcopies of the entire trial transcripts. As a result, counsel and the court agreed to adjournthe final submissions in this case to Tuesday September 5, 2017 at 10:00 a.m.

[26]

Counsel are to exchange their written submissions and reply and to file them with thecourt, as and when they are exchanged between themselves, and no later than July 31,2017.

Conclusion:

[27]

The motion is dismissed. The trial is adjourned to Tuesday September 5, 2017 at 10:00
a.m. for continuation and closing submissions as directed.

Costs:

[28]

Counsel have agreed that costs of this motion are reserved to me to be determined inconjunction with costs of the action at the conclusion of the case.

Honourable Madam Justice H. MacLeod-BeliveauReleased: May 15, 2017

CITATION: KM v. Marson, 2017 ONSC 2972
COURT FILE NO.: CV-08-0283-00
DATE: 2017 May 15

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
KM
Plaintiff
– and –
ROBERT TERRANCE MARSON and THE
HASTINGS AND PRINCE EDWARD DISTRICT
SCHOOL BOARD
Defendants

MOTION DECISION

MacLeod-Beliveau J.
Released: May 15, 2017

