CITATION: Kuhnle v. Fisher, 2017 ONSC 3336
COURT FILE NO.: 15-66151
DATE: 2017-05-30

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

IRENE MARGARET KUHNLE
Applicant )
– and –
REGINALD MAX FISHER and
CORINNE ANN FISHER
Respondents )

R. Gouin, and J. Dagher for theApplicant

P. Weber, for the Respondents

HEARD: In writing

RAY, J

[1]

I granted the applicant’s application for a prescriptive easement across therespondent’s property in narrowly defined terms consistent with the evidencebefore me. (2017 ONSC 2905).

[2]

The parties filed costs outlines at the conclusion of argument , and now havefiled their submissions. The applicant seeks substantial indemnity costs of
$72,910.07 on the ground that she was the successful party. The respondentseeks partial indemnity costs in the amount of $21,405.95 on the ground thatthe respondent had offered to assist the applicant in obtaining an easementotherwise than across the respondents’ property; and further , that the order I
granted would not permit development of the Kuhnle property which they claimis what the claim was all about. In o ther words, they claim to be the successfulparties.

[3]

Firstly I find the applicants claim for $72,910.07 of a total of $89,000 costs inthe costs outline to be breath-taking. The property is one of modest value.
Had I granted a full right-of-way to permit the applicant to develop theproperty, I would have found such a claim totally disproportionate. Argumentoccupied half a day. The applicant’s materials were thin. Two counsel wereinvolved. The hourly rates charged did not properly reflect the principle o fproportionality. Leaving aside the quantum, which I find outrageous, noreasons at all were advanced for an award on a substantial indemnity scale.

ONTARIO

[4]

Having regard to the materials filed by the respondents as part of their costssubmissions, development of the property was clearly a live issue. That wasnever raised in argument however.

[5]

On balance, I consider that the parties should bear their own costs. Theapplicant was seeking a right-of-way in very different terms than those I
ordered. She sought an order unlimited in its terms. The respondents hadnever objected to the applicant’s occasional use of their driveway to accessher property. What the applicant got by way of a court order reflected whatshe had been doing. Had she not brought her application, it is quite likely thather occasional use would have continued. Had there been an offer from therespondents to acknowledge in writing her occasional use, as was ordered, I
would have considered an award of costs to the respondents ; but there wasnot.

[6]

As a consequence, there will be no order as to costs. Each of the parties shallbear their own costs.

Honourable Justice Timothy RayReleased: May 30, 2017

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
IRENE MARGARET KUHNLE
Applicant
– and –
REGINALD MAX FISHER and CORINNE ANN
FISHER
RespondentsCOSTS REASONS

Honourable Justice Timothy RayReleased: May 30, 2017

CITATION: Kuhnle v. Fisher, 2017 ONSC 3336
COURT FILE NO.: 15-66151
DATE: 2017-05-30

