CITATION: Kuhnle v. Fisher, 2017 ONSC 2905
COURT FILE NO.: 15-66151
DATE: 2017-05-11

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

IRENE MARGARET KUHNLE
Applicant )
– and –
REGINALD MAX FISHER and
CORINNE ANN FISHER
Respondents

R. Gouin, and J. Dagher for theApplicant

P. Weber, for the Respondents

HEARD: May 9, 2017

RAY, J

[1]

The applicant and the defendants are neighbours. The applicant seeks an order thatshe has a prescriptive right to use a portion of the northwest corner of therespondent’s property in order to access her vacant property – the Kuhnle property. Itis landlocked. Absent the right-of-way across the respondents’ property, there is nolegal access except from the Castor River on which the parcel is located. Therespondents, who acquired the property March 11, 2008 under Land Titles, say theyhad no notice of the applicant’s claim, deny that she has any such registered right,and deny that she has acquired a prescriptive right. In fact they first became aware ofthe applicant only in September 2011 when she visited her property. This issue cameto a head in September, 2012 when the respondents erected a gate and videosurveillance at the entrance to the alleged laneway right of way for security reasonsunrelated to the applicant.

[2]

The burden is on the applicant to establish a prescriptive right across therespondents’ property to exercise her access to the Kuhnle property. At the openingof argument, in response to my question, both counsel assured me that the materialfacts were not seriously in dispute and it would not be necessary for me to hear thevive voce evidence of the applicant.

[3]

The applicant inherited the Kuhnle property from her mother June 3, 1993 after herdeath. The Kuhnle parcel was what had been left after her father hadconveyed two of the three parcels (Wettstein property) in 1984 that he had acquiredin 1955. The portion he conveyed included a house and had frontage on the YorkCorners Road. After the 1984 conveyance the only access was by using the claimedright-of way. Up to that date, other access was unnecessary because the entireparcel, which included the Kuhnle property fronted on the road. No provision in the

ONTARIO

[4]

However, there had been a registered right-of-way to McPherson from 1891. Hislands were on the other side of the Castor River. The McPherson Right-of –wayenabled him access to the York Corners Road from his property on the other side ofthe river. The parties are agreed there continue to be the remains of a bridge thatMcPherson could have used. In any event the bridge has been gone for the past 40
years. The applicant says she remembered people many years ago using theMcPherson right-of-way to access the Castor River from the York Corners Road. Shethinks that many people thought it was a public access.

[5]

Appendix A contains a plan showing the different parcels and the laneway towhich the applicant claims a prescriptive easement. The parcel outlined in blueshows the Wettstein property. The Kuhnle parcel that remained after 1984 ismarked in pink. The Fisher property over which the applicant seeks theeasement is outlined in orange. Between the Kuhnle property and the Fisherproperty is a narrow strip partially highlighted in yellow. The strip identifies theMcPherson right-of-way from the river at its east end running to the York CornersRoad at its west end. It is in fact the respondents’ laneway and access to theroad. From the Fisher property to the road, it is gravelled and graded. However it isonly graded and gravelled as far as the respondents’ residence. From there to theriver (highlighted in yellow) it is passable only on foot because of the overgrowthwith trees and brush.

[6]

The properties all went into Land Titles in September 1999. Any period oftime calculated to support the claimed easement ended as of that date. 1 For thetwenty years to have been accumulated, evidence of usage must have started atbefore 1979. For the forty year claim, the starting date would be at or before1959.

[7]

The respondents acquired their property in 2008. Only the McPherson rightof- way was disclosed on the title. It is in favour of the dominant tenement,McPherson, to the east, not Kuhnle to the north. It had been vacant until 1988
when the previous owner built a house. The respondents purchased the property in2008 on his death. However they had known him for the previous 17 years. He

1

Land Titles Act, RSO 1990, ch L-5, section 51

conveyance or agreement included a right of access to the Kuhnle portion of theproperty after the rest of the property had been sold, rendering it land locked. Theparcel he retained was river frontage and land locked with no legal access. It wasvacant property.

had mentioned the McPherson right-of-way, but had never said anything aboutKuhnle.
To make out her right to an easement, the applicant must satisfy thefollowing essential characteristics:
a. There must be a dominant and servient tenement;b. The dominant and servient owners must be different persons;c. The easement must be capable of forming the subject matter of a grant;andd. The easement must accommodate – that is, be reasonably necessary tothe better enjoyment of – the dominant tenement.2

[9]

In addition, a claimant must establish a use and enjoyment of the easementunder a claim of right that is continuous, uninterrupted, open or notorious andpeaceful, and without permission, for a period of 20 years. It must be a use as ifthe claimant had the right to the easement or right-of-way. 3

[10] The applicant Kuhnle’s evidence is that between 1955 and 1984, she and herfamily owned the Wettstein property and used the right-of-way on a weekly basisby foot or bicycle to access the river for recreational purposes; and that her fatherwould use the access way to transport wood from fallen trees. It was not the onlyaccess to the Kuhnle parcel and the river. In 1984, her father sold the parcelfronting on the York Corners Road. At the time of the sale, he had discussionswith his then lawyer about whether the two parcels (the Kuhnle parcel and theWettstein parcel that was sold) touched at the corner. The lawyer’s description ofthe services make it clear that the applicant’s father believed that the parcelstouched; and “there was enough overlap to drive a truck through”. This suggeststhat until 1984, access to the river from York Corners Road was easily had bysimply driving across his own land. That raises the question about why the familywould find it necessary to use the McPherson right-of-way when they had simply tocross their own land.

[11] I do not consider the applicant’s evidence that at the time it had the appearanceof a public road at the time to be helpful. It is her (and her family’s) use that ismaterial. It was not in fact a public road.

[12] The applicant resided with her parents in Kenmore commencing 1956 when shewas about 4 years old until she finished high school in 1969. In 1984, her parentsmoved to Ottawa, and in 1988 her father died. She lived in Kemptville,

2
3

Barbour v. Bailey, 2016 CarswellOnt 9585,2016 ONCA 98, [2016] O.J. No. 3261, paragraph 56.(ONCA)
Barbour v. Bailey, supra, paragraphs 60-62.

[8]

[13] After the 1984 sale, she says that the family continued to use the right-of-way byfoot, bicycle, and vehicle since it was the only access to the river (my emphasis).
She says that since 1984 she visited the property at least yearly; and listedspecific incidents: May 1988; fall of 1990 when she saw the fence between herproperty and the Fisher property was down; October 1994 she visited the propertyand in November permitted a friend to go to the property via the McPherson rightof-way to ‘smoke a deer hide’; October 1998 she visited and saw fallen treesfrom the ice storm from February. In 2002, she wrote to the then owner of theFisher property to ask him to set up a ‘no trespassing sign’ because she had seensomeone had dug fire-pits on her property.

[14] Before 1999, there was no correspondence between the owners of the Fisherproperty and the applicant.

[15] It appears the applicant has been making enquiries from time to time since about1988 about selling the Kuhnle parcel, and corresponded with the surveyorJohnston, and the municipality. She did receive a letter from the surveyor – nowdeceased – that since she is an abutting land owner to the McPherson right-ofway she has the right to use it for access to her parcel from the York CornersRoad. He did not provide the source for that opinion, and the applicant is notarguing that that is an acceptable legal principle.

[16] The respondent’s evidence is that the site itself and the McPherson right-of-waywas largely impassable to vehicular traffic, tree covered and in places subject toflooding.

[17] There is no doubt that the requirement in paragraph 8 d has been met. Use ofthe laneway which is the old McPherson right-of-way is now the only viableaccess to enable her to enjoy her land-locked property. The parties are inagreement that river access to the property is not available.4 Similarly, the thirdrequirement (para 8 e) has been made out. It is clearly a use that is capable offorming the subject matter of a grant. 5

[18] The troublesome requirement here is the applicant’s use as noted in paragraph 9
above. Travelling by foot once a year, and sometimes more, down theMcPherson right-of-way prior to McRuer building his house on the Fisher propertyin 1988 when it was vacant land is like a tree falling in a forest when no one isthere. It can hardly be construed as open and notorious if no one saw her regularlyusing the path. There is no other evidence such as correspondence withMcRuer to suggest he knew of the frequency of her usage since she only used itonce or twice a year after 1984. After 1988, McRuer had a house there.
4
5

Barbour v Bailey, supra, paragraph 57, 58
Barbour v. Bailey, supra, paragraph 59.

Vancouver, Ottawa and the St Lawrence valley until 2000 when she started to live inFlorida and Texas half time each year.

[19] The jurisprudence suggests that a dominant tenement may not alter the usage.
While I have some difficulty finding the applicant has met the requirements in law toestablish a prescriptive easement on a path following the MacPherson right-of- way,because of her infrequent but regular usage; and thin evidence concerning theusage being open and notorious, I find she has brought herself within therequirements that for the 20 years commencing 1979, the usage of once or twiceper year establishes her right to access her property.

[20] As a consequence, the applicant is granted a prescriptive easement to use thegravelled laneway and then path along the McPherson right-of-way from the YorkCorners Road to the limit of the Kuhnle property only as a pedestrian, and amaximum of twice per year. The respondent is to ensure that the applicant has a keyor other means to open the gate so as to enjoy her access.

[21] Unless the parties can agree on costs, they may make submissions of two pagesor less within 15 days. I have their costs outlines.

Honourable Justice Timothy RayReleased: May 11, 2017

But other than asking him to put up a ‘no trespassing sign’ on the Kuhnle propertyfor her, there was no other communication. But all that established was thatMcRuer knew that she owned the parcel. Her evidence is that he saw her fromtime to time using the path.

WETTSTEIN

McPHERSON

KUHNLE
FISHER

I

1

.I

!
I

I .

••

orarnudiaJIIIAA
r.ll DIll lab 1CliiBI .
ISilDlllfuJI/IIItl ._a

.I!..JCIIISI- 1
'II'IDD

!,l! r.tl

C4Dml

•All.IIIIIa!Q
ISJ8-I'IIPJIS12'.

APPENDIX A

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
IRENE MARGARET KUHNLE
Applicant
– and –
REGINALD MAX FISHER and CORINNE ANN
FISHER
RespondentsREASONS FOR JUDGEMENT

Honourable Justice Timothy RayReleased: May 11, 2017

CITATION: Kuhnle v. Fisher, 2017 ONSC 2905
COURT FILE NO.: 15-66151
DATE: 2017-05-11

