SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE – ONTARIO
BETWEEN:
KWIK SNAKS LTD.
Plaintiff/Defendant by Counterclaim
- andANTHONY CHEPIL a.k.a. TONY CHEPIL, RICHARD
ZINCK, ANTHONY CHEPIL a.k.a. TONY CHEPIL
carrying on business as SOUTH STREET SANDWICHES,RICHARD ZINCK carrying on business as SOUTH STREET
SANDWICHES and SOUTH STREET SANDWICHES INC.
Defendants/Plaintiffs by CounterclaimBEFORE:

MASTER M.P. McGRAW

COUNSEL:

Domenic SaverinoEmail: domenic@westonlaw.caFax: (905) 856-1213
-for the Plaintiff, Kwik Snaks Ltd.
Anthony ChepilEmail: tonychepil@gmail.comFax: (416) 628-2454
-self-represented and representative for the other Defendants/Plaintiffs byCounterclaim

REASONS RELEASED: May 11, 2017
Reasons for EndorsementI.

Overview

[1]
This is a motion by the plaintiff/defendant by counterclaim, Kwik Snaks Ltd. (“KwikSnaks” or the “Plaintiff”) under Rule 37.14(8) of the Rules of Civil Procedure seeking to setaside the Order of the Registrar Dismissing Action For Delay dated January 25, 2017 pursuant to

CITATION: Kwik Snaks Ltd. v. Chepil et al, 2017 ONSC 2921
COURT FILE NO.: CV-12-451084
MOTION HEARD: 20170502
REASONS RELEASED: 20170511

[2]
Although this is a relatively straightforward action for the collection of amounts arisingfrom outstanding invoices, this matter has a long procedural history. The Defendants havebrought 3 motions for documentary production (twice seeking to dismiss this action) and theparties have exchanged over 10 Affidavits of Documents and produced over 5,000 documents ona piecemeal basis. The Plaintiff set this matter down for trial in February 2013 and tried to bookpre-trial and trial dates over the Defendants’ objections, however, this action was struck from thetrial list on March 31, 2014. The deluge of documentary production, multiple motions andprocedural steps have delayed this action such that over 5 years after it was commenced,examinations for discovery have yet to take place.
II.

Background

[3]
This action was commenced by the Plaintiff on April 12, 2012. The Plaintiff seekspayment of invoices in the amount of $115,369.25 with respect to the supply of food and relatedgoods by Kwik Snaks to the Defendants from in or about March 2010 to February 2012.

[4]
In October 2012, the Plaintiff requested that a roster mediator be appointed and onFebruary 12, 2013 mediation was confirmed for March 7, 2013. As pleadings had closed, theinvoices in dispute had been produced by the Plaintiff and mediation was scheduled, the Plaintiffset this matter down for trial on or about February 13, 2013.

[5]
At the request of Mr. Chepil, who took the position that mediation was premature, themediation was adjourned to July 29, 2013. On March 4, 2013, the parties agreed to a DiscoveryPlan. Mr. Chepil then refused to attend the mediation given that he had scheduled a motionseeking a further and better Affidavit of Documents which proceeded before Master Dash onNovember 7, 2013.

[6]
Among other things, Master Dash ordered Kwik Snaks to produce all purchase ordersand any records of orders downloaded and other documents. Master Dash declined to orderproduction of documentation with an accounting software and business consultant sought by theDefendants.

[7]
The Plaintiff sought to book pre-trial and trial dates on or about March 28, 2014,however, the Defendants refused to consent on the basis that the Plaintiff had not produced alldocuments ordered by Master Dash. The Plaintiff filed the certificate with respect to these dateswith the court, noting the Defendants’ position, however, because it was not joint filed it wasrejected and the matter was struck from the trial list on March 31, 2014 because a trial had notbeen scheduled.

[8]

The parties continued to exchange affidavits of documents and productions leading up to

Rule 48.14(1) (the “Dismissal Order”) and establish a new timetable. This motion is opposed bythe defendants/plaintiffs by counterclaim (the “Defendants”). The defendant Anthony Chepil,principal of the defendant South Street Sandwiches Inc., represents himself and the otherDefendants.

[9]
After the parties exchanged yet more Supplementary Affidavits of Documents andproductions, the Defendants brought a third motion which was heard by Master Pope on May 7,2015. The Defendants again sought to have this action dismissed for the Plaintiff’s allegedfailure to comply with the previous orders of Master Dash and Master McAfee.

[10]
At the attendance before Master Pope, Mr. Chepil advised that he would be servinganother Supplementary Affidavit of Documents listing a voluminous number of e-mails he hadlocated from Jinfeng Huang, an employee of the Plaintiff who was responsible for placing KwikSnaks’ orders, which he says the Plaintiff should have produced. Master Pope ordered thePlaintiff to make best efforts to obtain and produce the purchase orders which corresponded tothese e-mails within 60 days of receipt of the Supplementary Affidavit of Documents.

[11]
The Defendants served their Supplementary Affidavit of Documents on the Plaintiff onJuly 21, 2015. On December 31, 2015, counsel for the Plaintiff advised Mr. Chephil that thePlaintiff had located and copied a voluminous number of documents (including purchase orders)
sufficient to fill two bankers’ boxes. Plaintiff’s counsel requested that Mr. Chepil makearrangements to pick up the documents and pay the amount of $1,695.00 to reimburse thePlaintiff for the cost of making over 6,000 copies. Counsel also requested Mr. Chepil’savailability for mediation and examinations for discovery.

[12]
Counsel for the Plaintiff says a copy of the Plaintiff’s Sixth Supplementary Affidavit ofDocuments, listing over 2,400 documents, was sent to Mr. Chepil by regular mail on December31, 2015. Mr. Chepil states that he never received it.

[13]
By letter dated February 3, 2016, Mr. Chepil refused to reimburse the Plaintiff forphotocopying costs given that this was the first time that any such payment had been requestedand that the appropriate time to do so was when the parties agreed to the Discovery Plan (the
“February 3 Letter”). Mr. Chepil further noted that, on this basis, the Defendants had previouslyproduced voluminous amounts of documents without requiring reimbursement. Accordingly, Mr.Chepil requested that Plaintiff’s counsel release the documents without payment. Counsel for thePlaintiff did not respond to February 3 Letter.

[14]
The February 3 Letter was the last contact between counsel and Mr. Chepil until aftercounsel received the Dismissal Order on or about February 1, 2017. On February 6, 2017,counsel for the Plaintiff sought to schedule this motion and confirmed the first available motiondate, which was today.

[15]

The two bankers’ boxes containing over 2,400 documents comprising over 6,000

the Defendants’ second motion for productions before Master McAfee on August 15, 2014.
Master McAfee concluded that the Plaintiff had not made best efforts to comply with certainprovisions of Master Dash’s order dated November 7, 2013, including with respect to theproduction of invoices, and ordered the Plaintiff to make further reasonable efforts to search forthe documents ordered produced by Master Dash. Master McAfee denied the Defendants’
request to dismiss the Plaintiff’s action for failure to comply with Master’s Dash order.

photocopied pages remain in the possession of Plaintiff’s counsel.
III.

Rule 48.14 of the Rules of Civil Procedure provides as follows:
(1) Unless the court orders otherwise, the registrar shall dismiss an action for delay ineither of the following circumstances, subject to subrules (4) to (8):
1. The action has not been set down for trial or terminated by any means by thelater of the fifth anniversary of the commencement of the action and January1, 2017.
2. The action was struck off a trial list and has not been restored to a trial list orotherwise terminated by any means by the later of the second anniversary ofbeing struck off and January 1, 2017.
…
(10) The dismissal of an action under subrule (1) may be set aside under rule 37.14

[17]

Rule 37.14 of the Rules of Civil Procedure provides as follows:
(1) A party or other person who,
…
(c) is affected by an order of a registrar,may move to set aside or vary the order, by a notice of motion that is servedforthwith after the order comes to the person’s attention and names the firstavailable hearing date that is at least three days after service of the notice ofmotion.
(2) On a motion under subrule (1), the court may set aside or vary the order onsuch terms as are just.
(3) A motion under subrule (1) or any other rule to set aside, vary or amend anorder of a registrar may be made to a judge or master, at a place determined inaccordance with rule 37.03 (place of hearing of motions).

[18]
The parties agree that the applicable test on a motion to set aside a dismissal order of theregistrar under Rule 37.14 is set out in Reid v. Dow Corning Corp., [2001] O.J. No. 2365
(S.C.J.). At paragraph 41 of Reid, Master Dash set out four (4) factors which a plaintiff mustsatisfy:
i.)

The plaintiff must adequately explain the delay in the progress of thelitigation from the institution of the action until the deadline for setting theaction down for trial, satisfying the court that steps were being taken toadvance the litigation toward trial or if such steps were not taken to

[16]

The Law and Analysis

iii.)
iv.)

[19]
In Scaini v. Prochnicki, 2007 ONCA 63, the Court of Appeal held that a plaintiff is notrequired to satisfy each of the 4 factors set out in Reid. Rather than applying a rigid test, the courtis to take a contextual approach considering and weighing all relevant factors to determine theorder that is just in the circumstances of the particular case. While there may be other relevantfactors, these 4 will be the main ones. It may be that in a particular case, one factor on which theplaintiff comes up short is of such importance that, taken together with the other factors, theplaintiff’s motion must fail (see Scaini at paras 21-28).

[20]
I am also mindful of the Court of Appeal’s decisions in Marche D’Alimentation DenisTheriault Ltee. v. Giant Tiger Stores Ltd., 2007 ONCA 695 and MDM Plastics Limited v. VincorInternational Inc., 2015 ONCA 28. In particular, Sharpe J.A. noted at para. 34 of Giant Tiger:
“Expeditious justice must be balanced with the public interest in having disputesdetermined on their merits. Where, despite the delay, the defendant would not beunfairly prejudiced should the matter proceed for resolution on the merits, accordingthe plaintiff an indulgence is generally favoured.”

[21]

Further, in Giant Tiger and MDM Plastics, the Court of Appeal held that the principle of

ii.)

explain why. For example, the complexities of the case and the number ofparties may have required significantly more time to move the actiontoward trial or the delay was caused by interlocutory matters or appeals.
The plaintiff could also explain that the action was stalled due to theinattention or negligence of her solicitors which was contrary to herinstructions or expectations. It is absolutely essential that the plaintiff leadsatisfactory evidence that she personally always intended the action toproceed to trial without delay;The plaintiff or her counsel must lead satisfactory evidence to explain thatshe always intended to set the action down within the applicable time limitbut failed to do so out of inadvertence such that the dismissal order wasmade as a result of inadvertence;The plaintiff must demonstrate that she moved forthwith to set aside thedismissal order as soon as it came to their attention;The plaintiff must convince the court that the defendants have notdemonstrated any significant prejudice in presenting their case at trial as aresult of the plaintiff’s delay or as a result of steps taken following thedismissal of the action. The court takes note that witnesses’ memoriesgenerally tend to fade over time and that sometimes it is difficult to locatewitnesses or documents, however, to bar the plaintiff from proceedingwith her action on the ground of prejudice, the defendant must leadevidence of actual prejudice. This might include evidence of specifieddocuments lost over time, or destroyed following a dismissal, or ofspecific witnesses who have died, or have disappeared and the defendanthas been unable to locate them with due diligence. While litigation isoutstanding the defendants must take care to obtain and preserve evidence;

[22]
The Plaintiff submits that the history of these proceedings demonstrates that Kwik Snaksalways intended that this action would proceed to trial and that the delays in moving the actionforward were largely caused by the voluminous productions and related motions. Plaintiff’scounsel also notes that he moved immediately to set aside the Dismissal Order.

[23]
Counsel for the Plaintiff states that it was out of inadvertence that he did not respond tothe February 3 Letter. He admits that he should have responded to the letter and does not knowwhy he did not as he normally would have done so. He further states that it was out ofinadvertence and the fact that the action was stalled as a result of the dispute over thereimbursement for photocopying charges that he took no further steps in the approximately oneyear period between receiving the February 3 Letter and the Dismissal Order. Plaintiff’s counselfurther advises that it was his decision, not his client’s, to insist on reimbursement for thephotocopies.

[24]
The Plaintiff also submits that the Defendants would not suffer any actual prejudice ifthis action proceeds to trial this is a document driven collection matter based on invoices and allrelevant documents have been preserved.

[25]
Mr. Chepil submits that the failure of Plaintiff’s counsel to respond to the February 3
Letter is evidence of the Plaintiff’s intention to no longer pursue this action to trial. He also statesthat the Plaintiff is responsible for much of the delay in moving this action forward given thePlaintiff’s inadequate production of documents and failure to comply with the orders of MastersDash and McAfee which required the Defendants to bring 3 motions.

[26]
Mr. Chepil further submits that setting aside the Dismissal Order would result insignificant prejudice to the Defendants in presenting their case at trial. He says that after morethan 5 years there has been a complete lack of discovery such that other than the 433 invoiceswhich the Plaintiff relies on, few relevant documents have been produced. He says the Plaintiffadmits as much in Schedule “C” of the Plaintiff’s Fourth Supplementary Affidavit of Documents
(where the Plaintiffs state that all purchase orders for invoices-purchase orders, includinginternet purchaser order records were not preserved). Mr. Chepil further states that prejudice ispresumed after 5 years in these circumstances.

[27]
As a result of these circumstances, Mr. Chepil states that the Defendants will be forcedto rely on witness testimony which he says is apparent from the Defendants’ pleadings. WhileMr. Chepil acknowledges that this is “usually uncommon in Liquidated cases” this case is anexception. Among the 14 witnesses proposed by the Defendants are the owner and manager ofKwik Snaks,the Plaintiff’s former bookkeeper and numerous former drivers and kitchenworkers, some of whom cannot be located while those who can will have waning memories. The

finality is also relevant to the fourth Reid factor such that, when an action has been disposed of ina party’s favour, even as a result of delay and not on the merits, the party’s entitlement to rely onthe finality principle grows stronger as the years pass. Even where the party relying on the ordercould still defend itself despite the delay, at some point the interest in finality must trump theplaintiff’s request for an indulgence (see MDM Plastics, para. 27).

[28]
Applying the Reid factors and taking the contextual approach set out above, in my view,the history of this action demonstrates that the Plaintiff always intended this action to proceed totrial. Specifically, the Plaintiff set this matter down for trial and tried to schedule mediation, pretrial and trial dates and examinations for discovery. While the Plaintiff’s production ofdocuments has been less than ideal, the Defendants must also bear some responsibility for the 3
production motions (and twice trying to dismiss the Plaintiff’s action) including the latediscovery of the e-mails which resulted in Master Pope’s order and the current, undeliveredphotocopies. Up to the February 3 Letter, this action was moving forward, albeit at a slow pace,but a pace for which both parties share responsibility.

[29]
After the February 3 Letter, I accept the explanation of Plaintiff’s counsel that his failureto respond or to take any further steps was inadvertent and related to the overall delay in theseproceedings arising from the disagreement over reimbursement for photocopying charges andnot evidence of any intention by the Plaintiff to not pursue this action. Accordingly, I find thatthe Plaintiff has provided an acceptable explanation for the delay, that the Dismissal Order aroseout of inadvertence and, as is apparent from the record, the Plaintiff moved forthwith to set theDismissal Order aside.

[30]
I also conclude that the Defendants have not demonstrated that they would suffer anyactual prejudice if the Dismissal Order is set aside and this action proceeds to trial to bedetermined on its merits. This is a claim for unpaid invoices in which over 5,000 documents havealready been produced. The purchase orders and related documents, currently copied and in thepossession of counsel for the Plaintiff, have been preserved and will be produced to theDefendants in short order. The nature of the Plaintiff’s claim as a collection matter combinedwith the sheer volume of productions, support the conclusion that this is a document driven case.
Mr. Chepil’s ongoing and significant efforts over the last 5 years to obtain more documents,including bringing 3 production motions, further supports this conclusion. There is also noevidence before me to support Mr. Chepil’s submission that this particular collection matter is anexception.

[31]
To the extent to which the Defendants must rely on witness testimony, which theDefendants submit is obvious from their pleadings (indicating that they knew this from theoutset), as set out in Reid, the Defendants have a responsibility to obtain and preserve thisevidence while litigation is ongoing.

[32]
Having weighed all of the factors and applied a contextual approach, I conclude that themost just result in the circumstances is that the Dismissal Order be set aside so that this actioncan proceed to trial to be decided on its merits. Accordingly, the Plaintiff’s motion is granted andthe Dismissal Order is set aside and the Plaintiff is granted leave to restore this matter to the triallist.

[33]

In order to provide sufficient time to complete the remaining steps leading up to trial,

Plaintiff intends to call one witness, the manager of Kwik Snaks.

[34]
To that end, the current stalemate over reimbursement for the photocopies must endimmediately. In this regard, I agree with Mr. Chepil that pursuant to Rule 29.01.03(3)(c), such arequirement should have been provided for in the Discovery Plan agreed to by the parties. It wasnot, and the parties previously produced documents without the requirement for reimbursement.
It was not open to Plaintiff’s counsel to unilaterally alter this term of the Discovery Plan withoutthe consent of the Defendants, which is unchanged by the number of copies made (which I notewere made before consulting with Mr. Chepil). Accordingly, the Plaintiff shall release thephotocopies to Mr. Chephil within 3 days of my order below without charge.

[35]
Finally, having regard to the principle of proportionality, the parties need to moveefficiently to examinations for discovery. Any relevant questions with respect to documentsproduced or additional documents can be asked at discoveries, which shall be completed no laterthan August 31, 2017.
VI.
Disposition

[36]

Order to go as follows:
i.)
ii.)
iii.)
iv.)

the Dismissal Order is set aside and the Plaintiff is granted leave to restorethis matter to the trial list;the deadline to set this action down for trial is extended to May 31, 2018;the Plaintiff shall release the photocopied documents to Mr. Chepil within3 days of this order at no charge; andExaminations for Discovery in this matter shall be completed by August31, 2017.

[37]
With respect to the costs of this motion, the circumstances giving rise to this motionwere caused by the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff sought and received an indulgence from the court toallow its action to proceed on a straightforward, non-complex motion. Accordingly, and in lightof my agreement with the Defendants regarding reimbursement for the photocopies, and havingconsidered the relevant factors under Rule 57.01, in my view, it is appropriate that the partiesbear their own costs of this motion.

Released: May 11, 2017
__________________________

Master M.P. McGraw

and being mindful that this action must proceed more expeditiously than it has in the past, it isappropriate to extend the time to set this matter down for trial until May 31, 2018.

