SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE – ONTARIO
BETWEEN:
MONIKA LASKI, WAYNE LASKI, MARTIN LASKI, CAROLYN LASKI, AND THOR
ALEXANDER LASKI
Plaintiffs
- andDR. VICTOR MONCARZ
DefendantBEFORE:

MASTER M.P. McGRAW

COUNSEL:

Derek L. SmithFax: (416) 408-3811
-for the plaintiffs, Monika Laski, Wayne Laski, Martin Laski, Carolyn Laskiand Thor Alexander LaskiEric S. BaumFax: (416) 966-9325
-for the defendant, Dr. Victor Moncarz

REASONS RELEASED: May 30, 2017
Reasons For EndorsementI.

Background

[1]
This is a motion by the plaintiffs Monika Laski, Wayne Laski, Martin Laski, CarolynLaski and Thor Alexander Laski seeking leave to amend their Statement of Claim pursuant toRule 26.01.

[2]
This is a dental malpractice action arising from surgical procedures and follow-up careprovided to Monika Laski (“Monika”) by the defendant Dr. Victor Moncarz, an oral andmaxillofacial surgeon. On or about October 3, 2011, Dr. Moncarz performed a surgicalprocedure on Monika which involved the removal of two lower implants and a bone graft. At a

CITATION: Laski et al v. Moncarz, 2017 ONSC 3368
COURT FILE NO.: CV-13-485735
MOTION HEARD: 20170508
REASONS RELEASED: 20170530

[3]
Monika’s condition deteriorated and on November 24, 2011 she was admitted tohospital and diagnosed with a chronic suppurative osteomyelitis of the anterior mandible with anacute exacerbation. She was treated with intra venous antibiotics for approximately 5 months.

[4]
In their Statement of Claim dated July 26, 2013, the plaintiffs allege that Dr. Moncarzwas negligent and did not provide the appropriate standard of care before, during and after theprocedure. Monika claims general and special damages in the amount of $450,000 and the otherplaintiffs claim $100,000 each pursuant to the Family Law Act (Ontario).

[5]
The defendant denies all liability and damages pursuant to his Statement of Defencedated November 26, 2014.

[6]
On December 17, 2015, the defendant served an expert report from Dr. MarshallFreilich, an Ontario oral and maxillofacial surgeon dated December 14, 2015. In his report, it isDr. Freilich’s opinion that Dr. Moncarz’s treatment of Monika met the standard of care and didnot cause her alleged injuries.

[7]
In or about September 2015, the defendant brought a summary judgment motion.
Pursuant to the Endorsement of the Justice Firestone dated March 18, 2016, the summaryjudgment motion was scheduled for July 11, 2016. This motion was adjourned to October 11,2016 pursuant to the Endorsement of Justice McEwan dated July 5, 2016 in order to permit theplaintiffs to obtain an expert report. The plaintiffs undertook to provide an expert report by July25, 2016 but did not do so until September 26, 2016, when they served an expert report from Dr.Mislav Pavelic, a general dentist.

[8]
The defendant took the position that Dr. Pavelic was not qualified to opine on thestandard of care provided by an oral and maxillofacial surgeon. Pursuant to the Endorsement ofJustice McEwan dated October 7, 2016, the defendant’s summary judgment motion wasadjourned on consent to January 17, 2017.

[9]
On November 17 and December 22, 2016, the defendant served rebuttal reports from Dr.Freilich to Dr. Pavelic’s report. On January 11, 2017, the plaintiffs served an expert report fromDr. Kevin Lung, an oral and maxillofacial surgeon licensed to practice in Alberta. The defendanttakes the position that Dr. Lung is not qualified to opine on the standard of care of an oral andmaxillofacial surgeon practicing in Ontario.

[10]
On January 17, 2017, in order to provide time for the defendant to respond to Dr. Lung’sreport, the summary judgment motion was adjourned by Madam Justice Matheson to CivilPractice Court on March 7, 2017. The summary judgment motion has since been withdrawn.

[11]

As a result of Dr. Lung’s report, the plaintiffs seek leave to amend their Statement of

follow-up appointment on or about November 8, 2011, Dr. Moncarz noted significant swellingand granulation in the tissue at the operation site and on November 10, 2011 performed a secondsurgical procedure to treat post-operative infection.

“13.
The Plaintiffs state that the incompetent medical management and damages notedherein were caused by or contributed to by the negligence, breach of duty, and breach of contractof the Defendant. The particulars of such negligence, breach of duty, and breach of contract areas follows:”.

[12]
The above preamble is followed by existing paragraphs 13(a)-(i) which purport to setout particulars of the defendant’s alleged negligence, breach of duty and breach of contract.

[13]
The proposed new paragraphs 13(j)-(p) are preceded by a proposed new sentence whichstates: “Further particulars of said Defendant’s negligence, breach of duty and breach of contract,include the following:”. In summary, the proposed new subparagraphs allege the following:
(i)

(ii)

(iii)
(iv)

(v)
(vi)

(vii)

the defendant did not create or maintain appropriate patient records includingfailing to diagnose changes to the anterior mandible alveolar and basal bone
(para. 13(j));the defendant did not appreciate that Monika presented a significantlycompromised unique complex medical dental situation, was predisposed to afractured mandible and did not follow appropriate procedures as a result (para.
13(k));the defendant did not complete the proper pre-operative documentation (para.
13(l));the defendant did not appreciate that there was no evidence to support the needfor an immediate and simultaneous regenerative procedure and did not obtainbone and tissue specimens (para. 13(m));the defendant required a more specific antibiotic regimen to be provided (para.
13(n));there was no evidence of specific post-operative instructions following thesurgical care of Monika’s complex case such that there should not have been adental load on the mobile graft and there should have been no insertion of thedenture (13(o));the defendant did not provide sufficient post-surgical care, including advisingthat she should not smoke and not wear a denture (13(p)).

.

[14]
There is an additional proposed paragraph, 13-A which attempts to explain that theproposed paragraphs 13(j)-(p) are further particularizations noted in other paragraphs of theStatement of Claim and how they were discovered.

[15]
The plaintiffs submit that the proposed amendments are tenable, provide particulars ofcauses of action already pleaded, do not constitute new causes of action and the defendant wouldnot suffer any prejudice which could not be compensated for in costs. The defendant submits thatthat these are material amendments which constitute new causes of action which are outside thelimitations period set out in the Limitations Act (Ontario) and that the plaintiff cannot rebut the

Claim. The proposed amendments include the addition of 7 new subparagraphs under existingparagraph 13 which states:

presumption of prejudice which arises in these circumstances.

[16]
Rule 26.01 provides that on a motion at any stage of an action the court shall grant leaveto amend a pleading on such terms as are just, unless prejudice would result that could not becompensated for by costs or an adjournment.

[17]
Both counsel rely on the general principles set out at paragraph 16 of Rayner v.
McManus, 2016 ONSC 422:
“As for the restriction on granting leave to amend a claim, when doing so would allowthe plaintiff to avoid an otherwise applicable limitation period:
∙ While the onus of proving prejudice normally is on the party resisting theproposed amendment, the situation is different in cases where a proposedamendment asserts a new cause of action after an applicable limitation periodappears to have expired. In such cases, an inference of incompensibleprejudice may be drawn, the onus shifts, and the party seeking the amendmentmust displace the presumption of prejudice; e.g., by demonstrating thatdiscoverability is in issue.
∙ A new cause of action is not asserted if the amendments simply plead analternative claim for relief arising out of the same facts previously pleaded, andno new facts are relied upon, amount simply to different legal conclusionsdrawn from the same set of facts, and/or simply provide particulars of anallegation already pled, or additional facts upon which the original right ofaction is based.” [references omitted]

[18]
The issue of whether or not a proposed amendment to a pleading constitutes a new causeof action was recently canvassed by the Divisional Court in Farmers Oil and Gas Inc. v. Ontario
(Ministry of Natural Resources), 2016 ONSC 6359. In Farmers Oil, Nordheimer J. endorsed thebroader, factually-oriented approach adopted by Lauwers J. at paragraph 25 of Sweda FarmsLtd. (c.o.b. Best Choice Eggs) v. Ontario Egg Producers, 2011 ONSC 6146:
“I

find that the broader, factually-oriented approach to the meaning of "cause of action" ininterpreting and applying rule 26.01 is the correct approach. It is consistent with the trendof the cases and is also consistent with a purposive approach to the interpretation oflimitations legislation. This means that the defendant's basic entitlement is to have noticeof the factual matrix out of which the claim for relief arises. In my view the existing setof pleadings raises the factual matrix of concern to the plaintiffs and within which thedefendants' possible liability is to be located. The proposed Fresh Statement of Claimsimply reframes those allegations of fact.”

II. The Law and Analysis

[20]
In summarizing the approach from Sweda, Nordheimer J. states at paragraphs 22 and 31
of Farmers Oil:
“[22] As may be obvious from the above, the distinction between the authorities reliedupon by the appellant, and those relied upon by the respondent, turns on whether theproposed amendments do, or do not, arise out of the same facts, or the factual matrix,that was pleaded in the original statement of claim. If they do, then the amendmentsshould be permitted. If they do not, and the limitations period has expired, then theamendments should be refused.
…

[31] In the end result, the requirement to read a pleading generously, and theconcomitant requirement to allow amendments unless they will inflict noncompensable prejudice, means that the presumption is that any amendment, that canreasonably be seen as falling within the four corners of the existing claim, ought tobe permitted. In that regard, I agree with the sentiment [page399] expressed byMaster Short in Brand Name Marketing Inc. v. Rogers Communications Inc., 2010
ONSC 2892 at para. 84:
I believe that equity dictates that if a defendant knows that the "finger oflitigation" is pointing in its direction, and an action is commenced on a timelybasis based on specific actions, this court ought to take appropriate steps to ensurethat the true lis between the parties is addressed, rather than permitting one partyto perhaps escape its possible liability by relying upon a technical Limitations Actdefence.”

[21]
As in Farmers Oil, I start with a generous reading of the original Statement of Claimwith due allowance for drafting deficiencies (see Farmers Oil, para. 23). In this regard, theplaintiffs’ original claim arises out of the surgical procedure performed by Dr. Moncarz on orabout October 3, 2011 and his care and management of Monika and her circumstances before,during and after this surgical procedure including the overall procedure and follow-upappointments and the additional surgical procedure for post-operative infection on November 11,2011 leading to her hospitalization and subsequent care.

[22]
In my view, the facts alleged in proposed paragraphs 13(j)-13(p) arise out of the samefactual matrix as the original Statement of Claim and therefore fall into the Sweda approachadopted in Farmers Oil. The proposed amendments provide the type of particulars which are part

[19]
Nordheimer J. distinguished the approach in Sweda from one which views a cause ofaction “simply as the legal basis upon which the claims for relief is based” (Farmers Oil, para.
14) an approach which was used in Fuda v. Jim McIntosh Petroleum Engineering Ltd., 2013
ONSC 2122, aff’d 2013 ONCA 378 and a related line of cases. In Fuda, the Court of Appealaffirmed the motion Judge’s decision denying proposed amendments where misrepresentationclaims asserted after the expiry of the limitation period advanced new causes of action that wereunconnected to the factual matrix pleaded in the original statement of claim.

[23]
In proposed paragraph 13(j), the plaintiffs allege that the defendant did not create ormaintain appropriate patient records including failing to diagnose changes to the anteriormandible alveolar and basal bone. In proposed paragraph 13(k), the plaintiffs allege that thedefendant did not appreciate that Monika presented a significantly compromised unique complexmedical dental situation, was predisposed to a fractured mandible and did not follow appropriateprocedures as a result and in paragraph 13(l) and that the defendant did not complete the properpre-operative documentation. In proposed paragraph 13(m), the plaintiffs allege that thedefendant did not appreciate that there was no evidence to support the need for an immediate andsimultaneous regenerative procedure and did not obtain bone and tissue specimens.

[24]
The factual basis and foundation for all 4 of these proposed paragraphs is set out in thefollowing paragraphs:
i.)
ii.)
iii.)
iv.)

v.)
vi.)
vii.)
viii.)

ix.)

paras. 6, 7 and 8 (the details of the procedures, treatments, follow-up care andcomplications);para. 9 (“inaccurate medical management of the Plaintiff’s circumstances”);para. 10 (“inappropriate to use the procedure in question”);para. 11 (“inaccurate medical management of her circumstances boththroughout the procedures and treatment, and afterward. Complications havearisen since said procedures and treatment, as well as the various prescribedmedications”);para. 13 (“incompetent medical management”);para. 13(b)(“knew or ought to have known that such treatment and medicationsposed an unreasonable or unacceptable risk of damage”);para. 13(c)(“administered treatment and medications on the Plaintiff in anincompetent or unskilled manner”);para. 13(d)(“the treatment and medications were incomplete and/or improperlyadministered and further failed to take the necessary, or any steps, to remedythe situation”); andpara. 13(i)(“incompetent in the medical management of the Plaintiff, withrespect to treatment and the administration of prescribed medications all of thecircumstances, and completed said medical management in an inappropriatefashion”).

[25]
Counsel for the defendant takes particular issue with the proposed amendments relatedto patient records and bone and tissue samples. Counsel submits that the allegations regardingpatient records should not be allowed because there is no mention of records in the originalStatement of Claim and they constitute a separate cause of action. Counsel further submits that

and parcel of and integral to the surgical procedures and the care and management of Monika byDr. Moncarz before, during and after the first surgical procedure on October 3, 2011. Theproposed amendments are factually intertwined with the existing allegations, do not allege anynew and distinct claims unrelated to the original claim, do not advance any “new theory ofliability” as the defendant alleges and can reasonably be viewed as falling within the four cornersof the existing Statement of Claim. I will address each proposed amendment in turn.

[26]
In my view, on a generous reading of the existing Statement of Claim, the amendmentswith respect to patient records and bone and tissue samples are connected to the existing factualmatrix related to the alleged inaccurate and incompetent medical management of Monika’s carebefore, during and after the original surgical procedure. There is no requirement that the actualphrase “records” appear in the existing pleading and what is pleaded in the Statement of Defenceregarding tissue and bone samples is not relevant to the Sweda approach set out above.

[27]
With respect to proposed paragraph 13(n), the plaintiffs allege that the defendantrequired a more specific antibiotic regimen to be provided. The factual matrix for thisamendment is set out at existing paragraphs 11, 13(b), 13(c), 13(d) and 13(i) all of which refer tomedications administered by Dr. Moncarz, in addition to paragraph 8 which refers to the IV
antibiotics prescribed to Monika during and after her admission to hospital.

[28]
With respect to proposed paragraph 13(o), the plaintiffs allege that there was noevidence of specific post-operative instructions following the surgical care of Monika’s complexcase such that there should not have been a dental load on the mobile graft and there should havebeen no insertion of the denture. In proposed paragraph 13(p), it is alleged that the defendant didnot provide sufficient post-surgical care, including advising Monika that she should not smokeand not wear a denture. In my view, the factual matrix for these allegations is set out at existingparagraph 11 which refers to inaccurate medical management of Monika “both throughout theprocedures and treatment, and afterwards” and the facts in paragraphs 7-9 which refer to herpost-operative care.

[29]
[30]
Counsel for the defendant also stated numerous times that the defendant’s position thatDr. Lung is not qualified to opine on the care provided by an Ontario oral surgeon is relevant towhether or not the proposed amendments are tenable. Specifically, since the amendments arebased on a report provided by an Alberta expert, and the defendants submit that this renders theexpert unqualified, the amendments are not tenable. Quite apart from the substantial leap in logicthat drawing this conclusion requires, it is not relevant to the broad, factually-oriented approachendorsed in Farmers Oil. This is an issue which could be advanced in a reply expert report andon cross-examination of Dr. Lung.

although there is a reference to tissue samples in the Statement of Defence, this is with respect topost-surgery samples and the proposed amendment refers to pre-surgery samples.

[32]
I further reject the submission of defendant’s counsel that the delays caused by theadjournments to the defendant’s now withdrawn summary judgment motion, which were in turnnecessitated by the plaintiffs’ obtaining expert reports, are relevant to my consideration ofprejudice. Any issues with respect to these delays were considered by the Judges who granted theadjournments. Specifically, in her Endorsement dated January 17, 2017, Justice Matheson notedthat having heard arguments on costs thrown away, she concluded that it was appropriate that theissue be addressed by the Judge hearing the summary judgment motion.

[33]
Having given the existing Statement of Claim a generous reading, concluded that theproposed amendments arise out of the same factual matrix, found that there is no prejudice whichcould not be compensated for in costs and considered all of the circumstances and factors above,I conclude that the proposed amendments in paragraphs 13(j)-13(p) should be allowed. As setout in the case law cited above, the defendant has received its basic entitlement to receive noticeof the factual matrix of the claim asserted by the plaintiff in an action commenced on a timelybasis. Accordingly, the plaintiffs’ motion with respect to proposed paragraphs 13(j)-13(p) isgranted.

[34]
With respect to proposed paragraph 13-A, in my view, this is not an appropriateamendment to the Statement of Claim. This proposed paragraph explains that the previousamendments are further particularizations of allegations noted in previous existing paragraphsand that Monika was not in a position to plead “with this level of particularlity until she receivedan expert’s medical report, on or about January 8, 2017”. The final sentence of this proposedparagraph states rather awkwardly that with respect to “this specific discoverability”, theplaintiffs note that the defendant’s expert indicated that the defendant’s treatment met thestandard of care.

[35]
In my view, the proposed paragraph 13-A is contrary to Rule 25.06(1) which prohibitsthe pleading of evidence. Proposed paragraph 13-A appears to be an effort to further advance theplaintiffs’ arguments on this motion using the evidence from the affidavit of Lorraine Whaleysworn April 27, 2017 filed in support of this motion. The fact that this paragraph is almostentirely comprised of evidence from Ms. Whaley’s affidavit further supports the conclusion thatthis paragraph is contrary to Rule 25.06(1) and should not be allowed. The plaintiffs’ motionwith respect to proposed paragraph 13-A is denied.
III.

Disposition

[31]
I am also satisfied that there is no evidence that the defendant will suffer any prejudicewhich could not be compensated for in costs if the proposed amendments are allowed and thatany presumption of prejudice has been rebutted by the plaintiffs. Discoveries have not beenconducted and the defendant can amend his Statement of Defence with the plaintiffs’ consent orseek leave to do so or serve rebuttal reports. This provides the defendant with ampleopportunities to respond to, discover and probe the allegations set out in the proposedamendments prior to trial.

Order to go as follows:
i.)
ii.)

The plaintiffs are granted leave to amend their Statement of Claim to addproposed paragraphs 13(j)-13(p);The plaintiffs’ motion seeking leave to amend their Statement of Claim toadd proposed paragraph 13-A is denied.

[37]
Counsel have exchanged costs outlines. If the parties are unable to agree on the costs ofthis motion, they may file costs outlines and written costs submissions not to exceed 2 pages
(excluding costs outlines) with me through the Masters Administration Office on or before June30, 2017.
Released: May 30, 2017
__________________________

Master M.P. McGraw

[36]

