CITATION: Liddy v. City of Vaughan, 2017 ONSC 2962
COURT FILE NO.: CV-09-383329
MOTION HEARD: 20170505

RE:

Carolyn Liddy, PlaintiffAND:
Anna Mauro, City of Vaughan, Bill Robinson, Michael Ridgwell, Defendants

BEFORE:

Master B. McAfee

COUNSEL: J. Streisfield, Counsel for the Plaintiff, Moving PartyF. P. Carpenter, Counsel for the Defendants, City of Vaughan, Bill Robinson andMichael Ridgwell, Responding PartiesF. Souza, Counsel for the Defendant, Anna Mauro and proposed defendant, GinoMauro, Responding PartiesHEARD:

May 5, 2017
REASONS FOR DECISION

[1]

The parties resolved the many of the matters at issue. On May 5, 2017, I signed a consentorder reflecting certain relief agreed to. The balance of the relief is referred to belowunder these headings:
1. Agreed upon relief at paragraph 4a-f of the amended notice of motion and return ofmotion;2. Leave to bring the motion to seek the contested relief at paragraph 4a-f;3. The contested relief at paragraph 4a-f;4. Timetable for relief at paragraph 4a-f;5.

Costs thrown away of the amendments to the amended statement of claim;

6. Costs of the motion.
1. Agreed upon relief at paragraph 4a-f

[2]

With respect to the relief at paragraph 4a, the defendant, City of Vaughan (Vaughan),agrees to serve a supplementary affidavit of documents pursuant to Rule 30.07. Vaughan

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

[3]

With respect to the relief at paragraph 4f, it is agreed that a representative of Vaughan, ofVaughan’s choosing, shall attend to be examined for discovery for up to 2 hours. Anorder shall go accordingly. The scope of the re-attendance is not agreed to, more of whichis said below.

2. Leave to bring the motion to seek the contested relief at paragraph 4a-f

[4]

The plaintiff submits that the trial date has now been adjourned and that leave should notbe required to bring a motion for the contested relief at paragraph 4a-f. The plaintiffsubmits that if leave is required, leave should be granted in the circumstances. Theplaintiff also argues that the relief is being sought as a result of the Vaughan defendantshaving served a request to admit and notice under the Evidence Act on March 6, 2017.
There is no evidence specifically stating the reason why leave is sought.

[5]

Although the trial date has now been adjourned, the action has been set down for trial.

[6]

In my view the issue is whether the contested relief at paragraph 4a-f is an obligationimposed by a rule listed at Rule 48.04(2)(b).

[7]

With respect to the contested relief at paragraph 4b, being the delivery by Anna Mauro
(Mauro) of a supplementary affidavit of documents pursuant to Rule 30.07, leave is notrequired because compliance with an obligation imposed by a rule listed at Rule48.04(2)(b) is sought.

[8]

The balance of the contested relief at paragraph 4a-f (paragraph 4a for “disclosure of theoriginals of all documents listed in schedule A to their affidavit of documents and otherdocuments disclosed to the plaintiff to date,” paragraph 4b for “disclosure of the originalsin all documents listed in schedule A to her affidavit of documents and disclosed to theplaintiff to date,” paragraph 4c, paragraph 4d, paragraph 4e and the contested relief atparagraph 4f, being the scope of the re-attendance) is not a request for compliance withan obligation imposed by a rule listed at Rule 48.04(2)(b). Leave is required to bring amotion for this relief. The evidence before me does not specifically address the basis forthe request for leave. I do not grant leave for this relief in the circumstances.

3. The contested relief at paragraphs 4a-f

[9]

The only contested relief at paragraphs 4a-f for which leave is not required is thecontested relief at paragraph 4b, which seeks an order requiring Mauro to serve asupplementary affidavit of documents pursuant to Rule 30.07. Mauro agrees to complywith her obligations Rule 30.07 and submits that an order ought not to be made requiringher to do so.

[10]

I decline to make an order that Mauro comply with her obligations under Rule 30.07. Sheagrees to comply with her ongoing obligations and in my view, having regard to the

agrees that the newly produced Building Permit Application dated June 7, 2001, will beincluded in the supplementary affidavit of documents. An order shall go accordingly.

[11]

With respect to the contested relief at paragraph 4f, I declined to grant leave.
Accordingly, I am not prepared to increase the scope of the 2 hour re-attendance beyondthat which Vaughan agrees to. The scope of the re-attendance is accordingly limited todocuments in the supplementary affidavit of documents only.

4. Timetable for the relief at paragraph 4a-f

[12]

A timetable for the agreed upon relief at paragraph 4a-f was not addressed at the return ofthe motion because the parties did not have my determination of the issue of leave and onthe contested relief at paragraph 4a-f. The parties shall confer and make best efforts toagree to a timetable for the service by Vaughan of a supplementary affidavit ofdocuments and for the re-attendance at an examination for discovery of Vaughan. Anyagreed upon timetable shall be submitted to me in writing for approval. If a timetablecannot be agreed upon, the parties shall make arrangements to re-attend before me. Anyre-attendance shall be scheduled, not necessarily take place, within 90 days of today’sdate.

5. Costs thrown away of the amendments to the amended statement of claim

[13]

Mauro seeks the sum of $2,950.00 comprising of 5 hours of further discovery of theplaintiff and 4 hours for pleadings at a partial indemnity rate of $350 per hour for coststhrown away of these amendments.

[14]

The Vaughan defendants seek the sum of $1,478.00 comprising of 9 hours for furtherdiscovery and pleadings at a partial indemnity rate of $150.50 per hour plus some timefor senior counsel for costs thrown away of these amendments.

[15]

The plaintiff argues that there are no costs thrown away of the amendments and that anyrequest in this regard is premature.

[16]

I am satisfied that the defendants are entitled to some costs thrown away at this time. InPlante v. Industrial Alliance Life Insurance Co., 2003 CarswellOnt 2961 (Ont. Master),amendments to a pleading were made late in the process, as is the case before me. Theplaintiff was ordered to pay an installment amount within 30 days and if the amount wasinsufficient to indemnify the defendant, the costs could be fixed by the presiding masteror by motion or by the trial judge at the time of final disposition.

[17]

I agree with the approach in Plante. An installment of $2,000.00 for Mauro’s coststhrown away of the amendments and an installment of $1,000.00 for the Vaughandefendants’ costs thrown away shall be paid by the plaintiff within 30 days. If theseamounts are insufficient to indemnify the defendants, the costs thrown away, onceincurred, may be fixed by me at the request of counsel or may be fixed by the trial judgeat the time of disposition of the action, subject to the discretion of the trial judge.

evidence before me on this motion and the submissions of the parties, Mauro’s agreementto comply with her obligations under Rule 30.07 is sufficient in all of the circumstancesof this matter.

[18]

If any party seeks costs of the motion and if after reasonable attempts to agree the partiesare unable to agree upon costs, the parties may make arrangements to re-attend before meto address the issue of costs. Any re-attendance shall be booked, not necessarily takeplace, within 90 days of today’s date.

[19]

For any re-attendance, the parties shall ensure that the time estimate is agreed to andsufficient time is booked.

Master B. McAfeeDate: May 16, 2017

6. Costs of the motion

