CITATION: Lundy v. Lundy, 2017 ONSC 3224
COURT FILE NO.: 16-70980
DATE: 2017/05/25

RE:

CAROL LUNDY, ApplicantAND
SEAN LUNDY, CO-EXECUTOR AND TRUSTEE OF THE ESTATE OF
MICHAEL LUNDY and in his personal capacity, MICHAELA MARCIA
KREIM, SARA KREIM, LIAM LUNDY, TRISTAN LUNDY AND THE
CHILDREN’S LAWYER, Respondents

BEFORE:

Madam Justice L. Sheard

COUNSEL: Gail S. Nicholls, for the ApplicantDouglas Buchmayer, for the Respondent, Sean Lundy, as Executor and in hispersonal capacityNo one appearing for the other RespondentsHEARD:

By Way of Written SubmissionsCOSTS ENDORSEMENT

[1]
The applicant brought a motion for leave to extend the limitation periods under theFamily Law Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. F.3 (the “FLA”) to file an Election for an equalization and tobring an application for an equalization. She also sought an order suspending the remainingdistribution of the estate and for an order that the estate pay the costs of an expert retained by theapplicant to value the deceased’s business and real property assets as at the date of marriage andat the date of death and, also, to applicant’s cost of an expert to value her own life interest in thematrimonial home.

[2]

By way of written reasons dated April 12, 2017 the applicant’s motion was dismissed.

[3]
In the event they were unable to agree on costs, the parties were invited to deliver writtencosts submissions. Costs submissions were submitted to me and these are my reasons on costs.
Position of the Applicant

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

[5]
The applicant concedes that the respondent was wholly successful on this motion, whichwas brought to extend those limitation periods, well after the expiry of the limitation periods.

[6]

In her submissions, the applicant sets out a chronology of events:
(i)

February 13, 2017- the applicant’s motion record was served;

(ii)

Friday, March 3, 2017, 5:11 p.m.-the respondent served an offer to settle;

(iii)

March 7, 2017-the applicant makes an offer to settle;

(iv)

March 7, 2017-the respondent makes another offer to settle; and

(v)

March 14, 2017-motion is argued.

[7]
The applicant submits that the offers made by the respondent were not genuine offers toassist in the settlement of the litigation because the applicant had no independent ability toquantify the value of the estate as at the date of marriage and the date of death. The March 7,2017 offer made by the applicant contemplated the applicant obtaining her own expert valuationreports, the cost of which was to be paid by the estate. Her offer also contemplated the estatepaying the applicant’s cost of the motion in the amount of $3,500 plus HST.

[8]
The respondent, Sean Lundy (“Lundy”) did not accept the applicant’s offer of March 7,2017.
Position of Lundy

[9]
Lundy seeks his costs of the motion on the basis that he was the successful party. That isundisputed by the applicant. The respondent seeks costs on a full indemnity basis because hisoffers to settle were favourable to the applicant, whose motion was dismissed. An analysis ofLundy’s offers shows that he is correct in that assertion as well.
The Offers to Settle

[10] In Lundy’s first offer, dated March 3, 2017 but served after 5 p.m. on that day, heconsents to extend the time within which the applicant is to file her election and to bring anequalization application to September 14, 2017; he agrees to suspend the distribution of theestate until September 14, 2017; and offers to provide the applicant with an expert report on thevalue of the deceased’s business interests at the date of marriage and the date of death and withappraisals of the real estate owned by the deceased as at those dates. Lundy’s offer also providesthat, if accepted by March 7, 2017 at 10 a.m., Lundy will not claim any costs of the applicant’smotion. His offer also states that if is accepted after March 7, 2017 at 10 a.m., Lundy he will beentitled to his costs on a full indemnity basis.

[4]
The applicant takes the position that the estate should cover the costs of both parties onthis motion on the basis that the deceased failed to adequately provide for the support of theapplicant and was “the author of this litigation”.

[11] Had it been accepted, Lundy’s offer would have provided the applicant with thelimitation period extensions she sought and needed; with an expert valuation report; and withreal estate appraisals, all at no expense to herself. More importantly, had she determined that shecould not, or did not wish to, rely on the valuations obtained by the Estate, nothing in Lundy’soffer of March 7, 2017 would have precluded the applicant from seeking the cost of anyappraisal or expert report she might have obtained in the context of her equalization applicationclaim.

[12] The applicant asserts that because the offer was not read by her or her counsel untilMonday, March 6, 2017, it was not “timely”. The applicant further asserts that Lundy had noreasonable expectation that the applicant would or could accept either of his offers to settle andthat they were not “good faith” offers.

[13] I disagree. Had she accepted Lundy’s offer, the applicant would have been in a betterposition than she found herself in after her motion was dismissed.

[14] At 1:36 p.m. on March 7, 2017 Lundy served a second offer to settle which dealt with theapplicant’s motion relating to the issue of the extension of the time limitation periods under theFLA. Again, Lundy consented to extend the limitation period to September 14, 2017 for theelection and for the bringing of an equalization application and agreed also to suspend thedistribution of the estate to that date. This offer does not withdraw the March 3, 2017 offer and issilent on the issue of the expert reports and the funding of those reports. It would appear to haveleft open the issue of the funding of the expert reports, to be argued on the motion. This offerstated that each party would pay his or her own costs of the motion “relating to the issue of theextension of the time limitation periods under the Family Law Act”.

[15] Aside from the issue of costs of that issue, there was no downside to the applicant byaccepting Lundy’s offer, which dealt only with the time extensions that the applicant wanted andneeded. The applicant did not accept this offer and at 13:53 on March 7, 2017 she confirmed themotion and served her own offer to settle that addressed all the issues – extensions of thelimitation periods and funding by the estate of the applicant’s costs of securing expert reportsand granting the applicant her costs of her motion fixed in the amount of $3500.00 plus HST, tobe paid by the Estate. The applicant’s offer was open for acceptance until 10 a.m. on March 8,2017.
AnalysisFactors

[16] The factors to be considered when fixing costs are set out in rule 24 of theFamily Law Rules, O. Reg. 114/99, (the “FLR”) and include that the successful party ispresumed to be entitled to costs, the reasonableness of the behaviour of each party and any offerto settle, any acts of bad faith by any party, the importance complexity or difficulty of the matter,the scale of costs, hourly rates and time spent, and the reasonable expectations of the losingparty.

Success

[17]

In this case Lundy was entirely successful and is presumptively entitled to his costs.

[18] The issues on the motion were not complex but the outcome of the motion was importantto both parties.
Unreasonable Behaviour or Bad Faith

[19] Lundy argues that the applicant took unreasonable positions on the motion, whichincluded her request that the estate pay the costs of the applicant’s experts, in an unspecifiedamount, and without any evidence relating to the anticipated costs of those expert reports. Lundyargues that, in essence, the applicant was asking for the estate to fund her litigation against it.

[20] In fairness to the applicant, her motion was dismissed not on the basis that that the reliefshe sought was unreasonable but, primarily because the applicant failed to establish that herdelay in seeking that relief was incurred in good faith. However, there is merit to Lundy’sargument that the applicant did not provide any estimates of the cost of obtaining those expertreports, and that the order sought, if granted, would have obligated the estate to pay an unlimitedamount.

[21] However, I do agree with the Lundy’s submissions that the applicant behavedunreasonably in refusing to accept his offer that dealt with the extensions of time, which wouldhave left for argument on the motion, whether the applicant was entitled to some funding fromthe estate of the cost of obtaining expert reports.
Offers to Settle

[22] Lundy argues that he served two reasonable and timely offers to settle. I agree. Lundyfurther argues that the provisions of rule 18 (4) of the FLR apply.

[23] Rule 18(4) of the FLR provides that a party who makes an offer is, unless the court ordersotherwise, entitled to costs to the date the offer was served and full recovery of costs from thatdate, if the offer relates to the motion and was made at least one day before the motion date; theoffer does not expire and is not withdrawn before the hearing starts; the offer is not accepted; andthe party who made the offer obtains an order that is as favourable as or more favourable than theoffer.

[24]

Rule 18(4) must be viewed in the context of rule 24.

[25] Lundy has provided two Bills of Costs. In the first, Lundy shows total fees anddisbursements on a partial indemnity scale, substantial indemnity scale and a full indemnityscale. In the second, Lundy has broken down the time spent prior to, and following the March 3,2017 offer to settle. In applying the provisions of rule 18 of the FLR, I conclude that the secondBill of Costs is one that should be considered by the Court.

Complexity and Importance

indemnity fees are calculated at $4634.10, inclusive of2017 offer to settle. Thereafter, Lundy’s full indemnitylawyer hours, 13.3 law clerk hours, and 3.6 articlingcombined with the full indemnity fees total $19,329.19

[27] The applicant has submitted a costs outline which sets out the cost submissions of theapplicant, in the event she was successful. The applicant’s lawyer records a total of 8.0 hours forpreparation of the motion record, an affidavit of the applicant, preparation of the factum andpreparation for the motion, 1.95 hours spent by a law student on research. Total fees,disbursements and HST claimed by the applicant are $6,582.39.
Hourly Rates, Time Spent and Proportionality

[28] The applicant submits that the time spent by junior counsel for Lundy of 59.9 hours isunreasonable and disproportionate given the issues before the court and even more so whencompared to the 8.0 hours invested by the applicant’s counsel on the motion, plus a counsel feeon the motion of $1,500.00.

[29] The applicant takes no issue with the hourly rates charged by junior counsel but does takeissue with the hourly rates charged by counsel for Lundy of $550 per hour whereas theapplicant’s lawyer, called to the bar in 1970, charges only to $500 per hour.

[30] The applicant argues that Lundy’s costs on a full indemnity basis should not exceed thoseincurred by the applicant of $5,500.00.
i.

to indemnify successful litigants for the costs of litigation;

ii.

to encourage settlement; and

iii.

to discourage and sanction inappropriate behaviour by litigants.

[32] The Court must also consider proportionality: what is fair and reasonable andproportionate to the proceedings? The full indemnity costs of the applicant as outlined in herCosts Outline (fees, disbursements and HST) are approximately one-third of the amount beingsought by Lundy on a partial indemnity basis and, after his March 7, 2017 offer to settle, asubstantial indemnity basis. Given the complexity of the proceedings and the issues on themotion, I cannot conclude that the time spent was reasonably necessary. However, I also do notconclude that the 8.0 hours spent by the applicant’s counsel should be used as the proper amountof time.

[33] As set out in my Reasons, I found the applicant’s materials to be wanting. For example,the applicant’s materials failed to adequately explain why she failed to assert a claim or failed toseek an extension of the FLA limitation periods to allow her time to investigate and evaluate her

[26] In Lundy’s Bill of Costs, partialHST up to and including the March 3,fees total $14,695.09 and include 47.4
student hours. The partial indemnity feesinclusive of HST.

Disposition

[34] In consideration of the above factors and the submissions of the parties, I conclude thatLundy is entitled to costs of this motion fixed in the amount of $15,000.00, payable by theapplicant in any event of the cause, should she bring an application under the Succession LawReform Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.26 (the “SLRA”), or by September 14, 2017, should she choose notto pursue a claim under the SLRA.

L. Sheard J.
Released: May 25, 2017

FLA claim. Also, the applicant’s affidavit referred to correspondence and negotiations thatmight have had a bearing on the issues on the motion, but did not attach any of those to heraffidavit. While it may not be true in all cases, time spent on preparation of materials can bereflected in the end product.

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
RE:

CAROL LUNDY - ApplicantAND
SEAN LUNDY, CO-EXECUTOR AND
TRUSTEE OF THE ESTATE OF
MICHAEL LUNDY and in his personalcapacity, MICHAELA MARCIA
KREIM, SARA KREIM, LIAM
LUNDY, TRISTAN LUNDY, and THE
CHILDREN’S LAWYER-Respondents

BEFORE:

Madam Justice Liza Sheard

COUNSEL: Gail S. Nicholls, for the ApplicantDouglas Buchmayer, for the Respondent,Sean Lundy, as Executor and in hispersonal capacityNo one appearing for the otherRespondents

COSTS ENDORSEMENT

L. Sheard J.
Released: May 25, 2017

CITATION: CITATION: Lundy v. Lundy, 2017 ONSC 3224
COURT FILE NO.: 16-70980
DATE: 2017/05/25

