CITATION: Lupien v. Carmichael, 2017 ONSC 2929
COURT FILE NO.: FC-16-803-0
DATE: 2017/05/16

RE:

Stephane Vincent Lupien, ApplicantAND
Angela Faye Carmichael, Respondent

BEFORE:

M. Linhares de Sousa J.

COUNSEL: Mr. A. Merizzi, counsel for the ApplicantMs. N. Pappin, counsel for the RespondentHEARD:

By Written SubmissionsDECISION ON COST

[1]

I have now had the opportunity of considering the parties’ written submissions on costs.

This matter involved a motion and cross motion dealing with the principal issues of custody andaccess, child support, some sundry property issues and the issue of a restraining order. For thereasons given in my decision, I did not deal with the property issues nor with the issue ofretroactive child support which I concluded would be best left to the pending trial.

[2]

Pursuant to Rule 24(1) of the Family Law Rules, O. Reg. 114/99 (the “Family Law

Rules”), the successful party is presumed entitled to costs unless there is a reason not to awardsuch costs, as for example such a party has behaved unreasonably or in bad faith. No party in thismatter has been substantially successful on all of the issues on the motion. Success on thequestion of custody and access, with respect to timesharing is genuinely divided. Ms.Carmichael, however, was successful on the issue of final decision-making authority pending thetrial of the issue.

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

[3]

With respect to child support ordered on the motion, while Mr. Lupien did not deny that

he was obligated to pay some child support for the child McKenzy, he disputed the amount. In

an interim basis, was totally successful.

[4]

Ms. Carmichael was also completely successful on the issue of the restraining order.

[5]

Neither party filed formal offers to settle the issues on this motion. Consequently, neither

party can benefit from the operation of Rule 18 of the Family Law Rules.

[6]

I am not prepared to find that on the facts of this case, where there has been allegations of

domestic violence and concurrent criminal proceedings, either party acted unreasonably or in badfaith.

[7]

With respect to the Rule 24(11) of the Family Law Rules, cost factors to be considered, in

this matter was certainly important to the parties. It did not have a greater public interestimportance. Nor was it particularly complex or difficult.

[8]

I have examined the respective bills of cost for the parties’ lawyers. Given the nature of

the issues and the litigation and the respective experience of counsel, I cannot find themunreasonable.

[9]

In the case of Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario (2004),

71 O. R. (3d) (Ont. C. A.), the Ontario Court of Appeal indicated that a costs award should be a
“fair and reasonable amount that should be paid by the unsuccessful parties rather than any exactmeasure of the actual costs of the successful litigant”. A “fair and reasonable amount” is that

fact, he had not paid any child support for the child McKenzy. On this issue, Ms. Carmichael, on

amount which the unsuccessful party could reasonably have expected to pay in the event of lack

[10]

In view of Ms. Carmichael’s greater success on the issues before the court, I am

persuaded that she should receive some contribution towards her costs. In view of the results atthe motion, Mr. Lupien could reasonably have expected to pay those costs.

[11]

I therefore fix the costs at $1,500, all in, and order Mr. Lupien to pay those costs to Ms.

Carmichael within 30 days of this order.

M. Linhares de Sousa J.
Released: May 16, 2017

of success in the litigation.

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
RE:

Stephane Vincent Lupien, ApplicantAND
Angela Faye Carmichael, Respondent

BEFORE:

M. Linhares de Sousa J.

COUNSEL: Mr. A. Merizzi, counsel for the ApplicantMs. N. Pappin, counsel for theRespondent

DECISION ON COST

M. Linhares de Sousa J.
Released: May 16, 2017

CITATION: Lupien v. Carmichael, 2017 ONSC 2929
COURT FILE NO.: FC-16-803-0
DATE: 2017/05/16

