CITATION: Marin v. Office of the Ombudsman, 2017 ONSC 3333
COURT FILE NO.: CV-16-553147
DATE: 20170530

RE:

ANDRÉ MARIN, Plaintiff (Responding Party)
AND:
THE OFFICE OF THE OMBUDSMAN OF ONTARIO, THE LEGISLATIVE
ASSEMBLY OF ONTARIO and HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN IN RIGHT OF
ONTARIO, Defendants (Moving Parties)

BEFORE:

Mr. Justice P. J. Cavanagh

COUNSEL: Michael D. Wright and Elichai Shaffir, for the PlaintiffCatherine Beagan Flood and Iris Antonios for the Legislative Assembly ofOntarioRobert W. Little for the Office of the Ombudsman of OntarioHEARD:

Submissions in WritingCOSTS ENDORSEMENT

[1]
The Defendant the Legislative Assembly of Ontario (the “Assembly”) seeks costs on apartial indemnity scale of its successful motion to have the Plaintiff’s action as against itdismissed for lack of jurisdiction. The Defendant The Office of the Ombudsman of Ontario (the
“Ombudsman”) seeks costs on a partial indemnity scale of its successful motion to have thePlaintiff’s statement of claim struck out on the ground that it discloses no reasonable cause ofaction.
Costs Claimed by the Assembly

[2]
The Assembly requests an award of costs in the amount of $88,353.13, inclusive of fees,disbursements and applicable HST, on a partial indemnity scale.

[3]
The Assembly submits that the objective in fixing an amount for costs is to fix an amountthat is fair and reasonable for the unsuccessful party to pay in the particular proceeding ratherthan an amount fixed by the actual costs incurred by a successful litigant, and that in decidingwhat is fair and reasonable, the expectation of the parties concerning the quantum of a costsaward is relevant: Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario (2004), 71
O.R. (3d) 291 (C.A.), at paras. 26, 38. I agree.

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

[5]

The Plaintiff submits that:
a. The time spent by counsel for the Assembly and the amount sought by theAssembly are not proportional to the nature and complexity of the motion. Themotion was heard in one day and there was one brief cross-examination on anaffidavit in advance of the motion.
b. The Plaintiff’s bill of costs, prepared for both of the motions, sought $48,969.78
on a partial indemnity scale and that the amount claimed by the Assembly is far inexcess of the amount that the Plaintiff could reasonably have expected to pay ifthe Assembly were to succeed on its motion.
c. The Plaintiff should not be responsible for disbursements for legal research.
d. The Plaintiff’s economic circumstances and ability to pay costs should be takeninto consideration.
e. Given all of the circumstances, it is not fair and reasonable for the Plaintiff to paycosts. In the alternative, he should only be required to pay a small fraction of theamount sought by the Assembly.

[6]
In my view, having succeeded on its motion, the Assembly is entitled to an award ofcosts on a partial indemnity scale. The amount must be fair and reasonable in the circumstancesand, in determining what is fair and reasonable, I consider the reasonable expectations of theparties concerning the quantum of a costs award as a relevant factor.

[7]
I have reviewed the Assembly’s costs outline. I accept that the motion was important toboth of the parties and that the motion was legally complex and required considerable legalresearch and work to be done for the factum, as well as considerable work to be done to preparethe affidavit that was filed on behalf of the Assembly. Nevertheless, in my view, the motion wasnot factually complex and the amount requested exceeds the amount that is fair and reasonable inthe circumstances. In my view, the number of hours expended for preparing the motion materialsand reviewing the responding motion materials, preparing for and attending the crossexamination of Ms. Deller, and preparing the Assembly’s Factum exceeds the amount of timethat for which the Plaintiff could reasonably have expected to be responsible in an award ofpartial indemnity costs.

[8]
I do not consider that this motion qualifies as one where the maximum partial indemnityrates are appropriate. I consider the partial indemnity rates that the Assembly used, without theadded inflation factor, to be reasonable for this motion. I would allow the disbursement for legalresearch: Austin Pharma Drugs Ltd. v. Albion Kipling Medical Building Corp., 2012 ONSC
4044 at para. 6. Although I agree that a party’s financial situation is a factor that a court may

[4]
The Assembly submits that the Plaintiff sought over $3 million in damages and that theAssembly was entirely successful on its motion. It submits that the motion was very important toboth of the parties, that the motion was legally complex, and that the amount claimed is what thePlaintiff should reasonably have expected to pay were the Assembly to succeed on the motion.

[9]
In my view, the amount that is fair and reasonable for fees to be paid to the Assembly forthis motion on a partial indemnity scale is $40,000, including the counsel fee for the attendanceat the hearing of the motions, which, with HST, is $45,200. The disbursements of $4,783.67,inclusive of HST, are proper.

[10]

The total award of costs in favour of the Assembly is, therefore, $49,983.67.

Costs Claimed by the Ombudsman

[11] The Ombudsman seeks costs in the amount of $34,835.11, inclusive of fees,disbursements and HST on a partial indemnity scale.

[12] The Ombudsman submits that the action would have been long and complex and that theOmbudsman’s motion was an efficient and timely step that saved both parties from incurring thesignificant legal costs that the litigation would have entailed. The Ombudsman also submits thatthe legal issues were novel and that the Ombudsman staffed the file appropriately.

[13] The Plaintiff makes essentially the same submissions as were made in response to theAssembly’s claim for costs including that the amount claimed is not fair and reasonable in thecircumstances.

[14] In my view, the Ombudsman’s claim for costs exceeds the amount that would be fair andreasonable for the Plaintiff to pay in the circumstances.

[15] I have reviewed the Ombudsman’s costs outline. In my view, the partial indemnity ratesused are somewhat higher than is appropriate for this motion. The partial indemnity rates that I
consider appropriate for the Assembly for senior and junior counsel are also appropriate for theOmbudsman. In my view, this motion does not qualify as one where the maximum partialindemnity rates are appropriate.

[16] The legal ground upon which the Ombudsman moved, although perhaps somewhat novel,was not complex. The motion was not factually complex. There were no cross-examinations thatthe Ombudsman attended. I regard the number of hours claimed to exceed the number for whichthe Plaintiff could reasonably have expected to be responsible.

[17] In my view, the amount of fees that is fair and reasonable on a partial indemnity scale tobe paid to the Ombudsman is $15,000, inclusive of counsel fee at the hearing of the motion,which, with HST, is $16,950. The disbursements of $1,601.81 inclusive of HST are proper.

[18]

The total award of costs in favour of the Ombudsman is, therefore, $18,551.81.

Mr. Justice P.J. Cavanagh

consider when deciding the issue of costs, it is not determinative. In my view, having beenunsuccessful, the Plaintiff must bear the cost consequences that follow.

Date: May 30, 2017

