SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE – ONTARIO
RE:

ANNIE MAYER, Estate Trustee of the Estate of Johann Rubin andpersonally v. MORRIS ERIC RUBIN, Estate Trustee of the Estate ofJohann Rubin and personally, and others

BEFORE:

NORDHEIMER J.

COUNSEL: N. Tourgis & H. Juroviesky, for the moving parties, Morris Eric Rubin,Ida Rubin, Sarah Werner and Faigy Esther HammerP. Griffin, for the responding party, WEL PartnersHEARD at Toronto: written submissions

EN D OR SEM EN T

[1]
The moving parties seek leave to appeal from the decision of Myers J., datedMarch 1, 2017, in which the motion judge dismissed the moving parties’ motion todisqualify the applicant’s lawyers of record and for an order that the motion record besealed.1

[2]
This litigation involves allegations by the applicant daughter that her siblings andmother have improperly administered the estate of their late father. The facts underlyingthe motion are set out in the endorsement of the motion judge and need not be repeatedhere.

[3]
In order to obtain leave to appeal, a moving party must satisfy one of the two testsset out in r. 62.02(4) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, that reads:
Leave to appeal shall not be granted unless,
(a) there is a conflicting decision by another judge or court in Ontario orelsewhere on the matter involved in the proposed appeal and it is, in theopinion of the judge hearing the motion, desirable that leave to appeal begranted; or
(b) there appears to the judge hearing the motion good reason to doubt thecorrectness of the order in question and the proposed appeal involves

1

Rubin Estate v. Rubin Estate, [2017] O.J. No. 1007 (S.C.J.)

CITATION: Mayer v. Rubin, 2017 ONSC 3190
DIVISIONAL COURT FILE NO.: 116/17
DATE: 20170524

-2matters of such importance that, in his or her opinion, leave to appealshould be granted.

[4]
The moving parties have not demonstrated that there is any conflict in principlebetween the motion judge’s decision here and that reached in other cases. At best, themoving parties can point to other cases, with different facts, in which differentconclusions were reached. That does not satisfy the requirement of conflicting decisionsfor the purposes of the first test.

[5]
In terms of the second test for leave to appeal, the moving parties have notpointed to anything that would satisfy me that there is good reason to doubt thecorrectness of the motion judge’s decision. The motion judge found that, assuming therewas confidential information imparted, the moving parties had waived the confidentialityby placing the material in the motion record and filing it with the court. Morespecifically, the motion judge said, at para. 14:
The respondents’ evidence includes a full description of the purportedlyconfidential issues that Mr. Juroviesky had discussed with Mr. Handelmanincluding a copy of the May 5, 2015 email. Mr. Juroviesky served themotion record on the applicant’s counsel and filed it with the court in theordinary course. The motion record is currently in the public record and isavailable to all who might attend the courthouse and search the court’sfiles. In addition, during cross-examination of Ms. Mayer for this motion,Ms. Tourgis showed the email to Ms. Mayer and asked questions about it.

[6]
I have no doubt regarding the correctness of the motion judge’s conclusion that,having done so, the moving parties had voluntarily and intentionally disclosed the veryconfidential information that they claimed, through their motion, they wished to protect.
As the motion judge pointed out, there were processes available to the moving parties bywhich they could have raised the issue without revealing the confidential information.
The moving parties choose not to avail themselves of any of those processes.

[7]
In any event, I do not find that an appeal is desirable or that the issue raised is ofsuch importance that leave to appeal ought to be granted under the second branch ofeither test. As the responding party submitted in her factum:
Waiver of privilege and inadvertent disclosure are well entrenchedprinciples repeatedly canvassed and applied in the case law.

[8]
Consequently, the motion for leave to appeal is dismissed. The moving partieswill pay to the responding party her costs of the motion on the partial indemnity scale,which I fix in the amount of $8,000, inclusive of disbursements and HST, within thirtydays. I see no basis for awarding costs on a higher scale. It does not follow from the factthat the motion judge awarded costs on the full indemnity scale that any determination ofcosts in a subsequent step in the proceeding should be similarly treated. In any event, the

The moving parties rely on both tests on their motion.

-3-

NORDHEIMER J.

DATE: May 24, 2017

reasons why the motion judge exercised his discretion to order costs on the full indemnityscale do not apply to this motion.

