CITATION: McEwen v. Her Majesty in Right of Ontario, 2017 ONSC 3340
COURT FILE NO.: 13-1002
DATE: 2017/05/31

RE:

David A. McEwen, Plaintiff
– and –
Her Majesty in Right of Ontario, London Police Services Board, Chief of PoliceMurray Faulkner, P.C. Christopher Golder, S/SGT. Drouillard, P.C. Ian A.
Johnson, P.C. Chris Newton, P.C. D. Jeffrey Dunham, P.C. D. Jeffrey, P.C. ScottA. Chantler, P.C. Ron Grasman, P.C. Kevin Diachina, P.C. Martin Lessick, SGT.
Daniel Holek, P.C. Donald Woodley, P.C. Ross, P.C. Hilldenbrand, P.C. BarretWillis, P.C. Brian Armstrong, P.C. Nash, P.C. Joel Pavoni, P.C. David McKay,P.C. James Earl Pottruff, P.C. Paul Yovicic, P.C. Pamela Burke, P.C. KellO’Callaghan, P.C. Robert Brown, P.C. Jeffrey Brown, P.C. James Forsythe, KellyMills, Sissy Steeves, Mary-Ellen Emery, Vicki Redden, P.C. John Doe, and P.C.
Jane Doe, Defendants

BEFORE:

Justice H. A. Rady

COUNSEL: Melissa Scott, for the plaintiffDagmara Wozniak, for the defendantsHEARD:

May 29, 2017
ENDORSEMENT

Introduction

[1]

The plaintiff moves for an order abridging the time for service of three expert reports andgranting leave to call them as experts. In the event leave is granted, the plaintiff hasincluded a request for an adjournment of the trial so that the defendants can obtainresponding reports. The defendants oppose leave being granted. They say that they areprejudiced and cannot be compensated in the circumstances.

[2]

This motion presents a significant challenge in balancing the interests of the parties. Theplaintiff will be obviously disadvantaged if he cannot lead the proposed evidence of thethree experts. On the other hand, the defendants have not been able to respond andtherefore, they will be clearly prejudiced in their ability to defend the claim.

[3]

The case is very old, memories matter, and the trial has been already been adjourned atleast twice before. The plaintiff has previously been late serving documentation in

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

The Facts

[4]

The plaintiff alleges that he was injured by the police defendants when he was arrested onJuly 23, 2007 for careless use, handling or storage of a firearm. The charge was laterwithdrawn.

[5]

The chronology of the progress of the litigation need not be recited in detail here becauseJustice Grace did so in his comprehensive endorsement of April 3, 2017. It is fair to saythat its pace has been glacial, at least until Mr. Millar’s firm was retained to assumecarriage of the file in October 2016.

[6]

Following receipt of the file in November, counsel must have soon realized that muchwork was necessary to ready the case for the already scheduled trial date of June 12, 2017
– which had been marked peremptory on the parties.

[7]

Plaintiff’s counsel alerted counsel opposite of his intention to engage experts. Mr. Phelpsprepared a forensic economic loss report dated February 14, 2017. Dr. Sapienza prepareda medical- legal psychological report dated January 30, 2017.

[8]

On February 27, 2017, those reports were served. As an aside, it is not clear to me whyDr. Sapienza’s report was not served until some four weeks after its receipt. In any event,the plaintiff was prepared to consent to late filing of any reply reports.

[9]

A second judicial pre-trial was held on March 9, 2017 at which time the pre-trialconference report was completed. In it, the pre-trial judge noted:
Plaintiff recently served damages reports. Defendants seeking respondingreports. Plaintiff to serve any further expert reports by June 9, 2017.
Defendants responding reports by September 30, 2017. Defendants to move toadjourn a trial due to late delivery of expert reports by Plaintiff and will do sosoon.

[10]

As Justice Grace noted, the pretrial judge could not have been made aware that the Junetrial date had been marked peremptory on the parties when he made that endorsement.

[11]

The defence brought the necessary motion with the plaintiff’s consent. It was dismissedby Justice Grace on April 3, 2017. When the issue of the late served expert reports andtheir admissibility were raised, Justice Grace made it clear that this was a matter for thetrial judge to determine. In his endorsement, he noted:
41 I cannot impose another sanction on the plaintiff for the far too latedelivery of further expert reports. Rules 53.03(3) and 53.08 apply. Thetrial judge is the one who will determine whether the plaintiff will be

support of his claim during the course of the litigation. In fact, and most recently, the lateservice of material relating to his alleged economic loss claim derailed a trial for which afixed date had been scheduled for June 2016. And a defence adjournment request hasalready been adjudicated by Justice Grace on April 3, 2017 and dismissed.

[12]

The plaintiff then delivered another expert report, this one on the standard of care on May11, 2017. The defence has not yet been in a position to deliver any responding reports.
They have engaged an accountant whose report has not yet been finalized. Some of thematerial which Mr. Phelps reviewed was not delivered to the defendants until April 11,2017. A psychological assessment with Dr. Martin Resnick has yet to take place. Thedefendants have not had an opportunity to retain a standard of care expert although I wasadvised that the defendants have spoken to a potential expert.

[13]

This motion followed. The parties would like a ruling on the reports’ admissibility inadvance of trial because of its obvious impact on the respective parties’ potential forsuccess, on trial preparation and the length of trial.

[14]

I am essentially being asked to determine the matter as if I were the trial judge. They relyon Rule 53.03 (4) which provides:
(4) The time provided for service of a report or supplementary report underthis rule may be extended or abridged,
(a) by the judge or case management master at the pre-trial conference orat any conference under Rule 77; or
(b) by the court, on motion.

[15]

The plaintiff argued, albeit less than forcefully, that the defendants had advance notice ofhis intent to serve expert reports and that they have had ample opportunity to respond.
He suggests that they have ready access to experts – particularly on the standard of care.

[16]

There is an obvious irony in the plaintiff’s position and two points must be made. First,there is no evidence before me about the availability of experts to the defence. I am beingasked to speculate. Secondly, the prejudice to the defence has already been found to exist.
It is irremediable, absent an adjournment, which has already been refused. In that regard,I note this passage from Justice Grace’s endorsement:
18 It is clear from what I have written so far that the defendants will be prejudiced ifthe plaintiff is allowed to call the authors of the late served reports unless the trial isadjourned.
19 However, if the trial is not adjourned, if the parties are held to the term I imposedas a precondition and with their full knowledge, the likelihood of the plaintiffobtaining leave falls significantly.

[17]

When one balances the competing considerations, the scale tips in favour of an orderrefusing to permit the introduction of the proposed expert evidence by the plaintiff. Theunfortunate result is that the plaintiff is disadvantaged and significantly so. He may beunable to discharge his burden of proof at trial. It is true that he may have recourse

given leave to call the authors of the late served reports (Gary Phelps andDr. Melanie Sapienza) as witnesses.

[18]

Justice Grace could not have been clearer about the court’s position on the late deliveryof expert reports and its negative impact on trial scheduling. This has been a serious,recurring problem in London. Many times, the timelines in Rule 53.03 are more honouredin the breach. He also noted that Mr. Millar accepted his retainer on the terms that hadbeen imposed by that time. It is difficult to quarrel with those observations.

[19]

In the circumstances, I refuse to grant an abridgement of the time to serve expert reportsor leave to call them at trial.
“Justice H. A. Rady”
Justice H. A. Rady

Released: May 31, 2017

elsewhere, but I recognize that is, in reality, cold comfort. It would serve to prolong anyresolution of this already long delayed matter. On the other hand, the defendants have noremedy whatsoever (absent an adjournment that has already been refused).

