CITATION: Melis v. Zwanenburg, 2017 ONSC 2847
COURT FILE NO.: FC-04-1974-1
DATE: 20170515

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

CAROLINE MELIS
Applicant )
– and –
CORNELIS JOHANNES ZWANENBURG )
Respondent )

John E. Merner, for the Applicant

Jennifer Johnston, for the Respondent

HEARD: By written submissions

ENDORSEMENT
BEAUDOIN J.

[1]

On January 27, 2017, I released my decision with regard to the Applicant (Melis)’

Motion to Change. In response, the Respondent (Zwanenburg) had sought an order that Melisprovide security for any support payments ordered. I noted that there was no evidence before theCourt with respect to Melis’ existing policy of insurance although, I was advised that it was nolonger in effect and that Melis could not obtain insurance due to health reasons.

[2]

At that time, I relied on the original divorce order which contained this provision at

paragraph. 34:
If the wife dies without this insurance in effect, her obligation or liability to paysupport will survive her death and be a first charge on her estate.

[3]

I concluded that since the provision continued to be in effect and, subject to any further

submissions from counsel, this appeared to be the only practical security available.

ONTARIO

[4]

I have received additional submissions from Zwanenburg. He notes that Melis had filed

two financial statements in these proceedings; neither of which has listed a life insurance policy.

that there is insurance available totaling $360,125 based on three separate policies. Thesepolicies will either automatically reduce as the applicant ages, or will be carried only for a finiteperiod of time.

[5]

[6]

The amounts available will reduce as follows:

February 2017: $360,125 (age 60)

- February 2018: $328,750 (age 61);

February 2019: $289,375 ( age 62) ;

February 2026: $110,000 (age 70) and

February 2027: $10,000 (age 71).
Zwanenburg is not a designated beneficiary for any of these policies. The named

beneficiaries are a mix of Melis’ estate, her sister, and the parties’ adult daughter. The totalamount of insurance required to secure the Applicant’s support obligation is $296,773. Melisdoes not dispute that figure.

[7]

The Respondent notes that both parties will turn 70 in 2026. At that time, support will

still be payable at $1304 per month on an indefinite basis. Relying on Divorcemate calculations,Zwanenburg maintains that the total amount of insurance required to secure support as of thatdate will be $166,074. By that time, the total amount of insurance available to the Applicant willbe only $110,000 which will further reduce to $10,000 in February 2027.

[8]

Zwanenburg notes that Melis had equity in her home totaling approximately $101,000 at

the time of her swearing her financial statement on September 20, 2016. While Zwanenburgacknowledges that there is sufficient insurance available to provide security for support at thistime, there will be a deficit commencing February 1, 2026. He relies on the Court’s jurisdiction

His counsel sought confirmation of any insurance that may be available. Melis’ counsel replied

to make an order requiring one spouse to secure pay periodic support as set out in section 15(2)
of the Divorce Act, 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp) and cites the Court of Appeal decision in Katz v. Katz,

for support.

[9]

Zwanenburg asks that I order Melis to secure a collateral mortgage as security for support

in the amount of $166,000 that being the quantum of security required as of February, 2026. Hemaintains that the collateral mortgage could be treated as having a current value of $100,000
being the approximate current equity in Melis’ home. He further asks that Melis be required toobtain sufficient insurance policies to make up the difference between the $100,000 collateralmortgage and the current support obligation of $296,773 and to designate him irrevocably asbeneficiary.

[10]

On February 1, 2026, Melis’ ability to maintain existing insurance coverage would

terminate, and Zwanenburg suggests that security for support would be entirely in the form of acollateral mortgage for $166,074. He submits that a collateral mortgage should specify that itsvalue shall be determined in the event of Melis’ death or sale of the house as the totaloutstanding support obligation which could be calculated by counsel using Divorcemate orsimilar software. That amount would be paid out to him, regardless of the face amount of thecollateral mortgage. In other words, the mortgage would not result in a windfall to him.

[11]

In response, the applicant notes that she is 59 years of age, has retired from her position

in the government and is a cancer survivor. She maintains that the cost of securing additionalinsurance would be prohibitive.

[12]

She notes that the original divorce order addressed the matter of insurance. Paragraph 31

required the Applicant to name the child of the marriage and the Respondent as the irrevocablebeneficiaries of the insurance policy that was in force pursuant to her then employment. Theorder required the wife to name the husband as trustee of policy for the benefit of the child.

[13]

As already noted, paragraph 34 of the original order provided that if Melis died without

this insurance in effect, her obligation or liability to pay support would survive her death and bea first charge on her estate. Paragraph 35 provided “at such time that the child is no longer a

2014 ONCA 606, 50 R.F.L. (7th) 1, where Justice Simmons reviewed the law regarding security

child of the marriage within the meaning of the Divorce Act, the wife may deal with such policyof insurance as she shall see fit.”
In addition, paragraph 36 stated: “the trust terms upon which the trustee holds the

insurance proceeds for the child are set out in the executed minutes of settlement, paragraphs 40
through 52 and shall remain in force until such time as the child is no longer a child of themarriage under the meaning of the Divorce Act.”

[15]

The divorce order was based on the minutes of settlement signed by the parties on

November 20, 2006 which contained substantially the same wording. Paragraph 42 provides:
So long as either party is required to pay spousal support, and for so long as suchpolicy is available to her through her employment, the Wife will name the childand the husband as the irrevocable beneficiaries in trust, in equal shares. The Wifewill name the Husband as the trustee of the policy for the benefit for the child.

[16]

Melis submits that her only obligation to provide insurance for support is through the

policy of insurance through her employment failing which the support obligation would surviveher death.

[17]

Melis argues that she owns her current residence as a joint tenant with her sister. That

property was purchased on March 31, 2005; which agreement of purchase and sale predated theminutes of settlement and the divorce order. She argues that if a collateral mortgage wasregistered against the property, such an order would affect the sister’s equity in the propertyshould Melis predecease the Respondent. Such an order would be adverse to her sister’s interestwho is not a party to the proceedings.

[18]

Melis submits that the only security that needs to be provided is that as specified in the

minutes of settlement/divorce order; failing which her obligation to pay support would be a firstcharge on her estate.
Conclusion

[19]

It is apparent that Melis has sufficient polices of insurance currently in place to secure her

support obligations at this time. Any problem with security for support will not arise until 2026
when her insurance policies will no longer be available. It is important to remember that the

[14]

parties originally agreed that Melis’ support obligations were to be secured by her life insurancepolicies that were available through her employment.
The Court’s ability to secure a support order under the FLA and the Divorce Act was

canvassed by the Court of Appeal in Katz v. Katz, where it concluded at paras. 69, 70, 71, 72,and 74:

[69]
Given that a support order under the Family Law Act is binding on a payorspouse’s estate unless the order provides otherwise, on its face, s. 34(1)(k) isbroad enough to permit a court to order a spouse to obtain an insurance policy tosecure payment of the order following the payor spouse’s death. The concludingwords “or otherwise” in s. 34(1)(k) afford the court broad scope for securing thepayment of a support order.

[70]
Because a support payor’s estate is bound by a support order followingthe payor’s death, the court making a support order is entitled to secure thepayments to be made in the event of the payor’s death by requiring the payor toobtain and maintain life insurance for a specified beneficiary while the supportorder is in force and to give directions concerning the extent to which the payoutof the insurance proceeds will discharge the support obligation: see Laczko v.
[71]
The situation under the Divorce Act is somewhat different. There is noprovision similar to s. 34(1) of the Family Law Act listing the specific powers ofthe court in an application for support. Rather, the court is given broad discretionto impose terms, conditions or restrictions in connection with the order or interimorder as it thinks fit and just: ss. 15.1(4) (child support), 15.2(3) (spousal support).
It is generally accepted that as part of its discretionary power under these sections,a court may impose terms aimed at securing payment of a support order:128 (Ont. S.C.), at para. 97; Jardine-Vissers v. Vissers, 2011 NSSC
[72]
There is, however, no provision in the Divorce Act similar to s. 34(4) ofthe Family Law Act, making a support order binding on a payor’s estate. On thecontrary, it has long been held that a support or maintenance obligation underdivorce legislation ends when the payor dies unless there is a specific agreementto the contrary: Schwartz Estate v. Schwartz (1998), 36 R.F.L. (4th) 110 (Ont.
Gen. Div.), at paras. 23, 27 and 28. There are conflicting authorities acrossCanada concerning whether a court may order that support payments underdivorce legislation are binding on the payor’s estate: see e.g. Carmichael v.

[20]
QB), 34 R.F.L. (3d) 432 (Sask. Q.B.), at para. 14, varied on other grounds, 1991O.R. (3d) 1 (C.A.), at p. 32.[73]
In my view, therefore, the same power thatexists under the Family Law Act to order a spouse to obtain insurance to securepayment of support payments that are binding on the payor’s estate also existsunder the Divorce Act.

[74]
That said, where there is no existing policy in place, a court shouldproceed carefully in requiring a payor spouse to obtain insurance. This casedemonstrates the desirability of having evidence of the payor’s insurability and ofthe amount and cost of the available insurance. Careful consideration should begiven to the amount of insurance that is appropriate. It should not exceed the totalamount of support likely to be payable over the duration of the support award.
Moreover, the required insurance should generally be somewhat less than the totalsupport anticipated where the court determines that the recipient will be able toinvest the proceeds of an insurance payout. Further, the amount of insurance to bemaintained should decline over time as the total amount of support payable overthe duration of the award diminishes. The obligation to maintain insurance shouldend when the support obligation ceases – and provision should be made to allowthe payor spouse to deal with the policy at that time. Finally, when proceedingunder the Divorce Act, the court should first order that the support obligation isbinding on the payor’s estate.

[21]

Melis does have insurance available, and based on the evidence before me, the value of

that insurance will decline over time until the costs of maintaining it will become prohibitive atage 71. I am not willing to order Melis to obtain an additional mortgage on her property giventhe impact on the joint tenant’s interest in the property and the Court of Appeals’ direction thatthe court should first order that the support obligation be a binding on the payors’ estate. Thisproperty was acquired before the minutes of settlement were signed and Zwanenburg did notseek any additional security beyond the issuance policies available through Melis’ employment.

[22]

Given that Melis’ half interest in the home she now occupies will pass to her sister in the

event of her death, it is difficult to estimate what other assets may be in her estate at that time. Solong as the current life insurance policies remain available to her, I conclude that I have thejurisdiction to order Melis to designate Zwanenburg as the irrevocable beneficiary until she

reached to the age of 71. I accordingly order that Melis designate Zwanenburg as beneficiary of70% of the total declining value of her policies of life insurance until age 71. In the event of any

[23]

Given the parties’ divided success on this issue and having regard to the costs award

already made, I do not believe that this is an appropriate case to order costs. If the partiesdisagree, they may make further submissions on costs which submissions should not exceedthree pages in length.

Mr. Justice Robert N. BeaudoinReleased: May 15, 2017

shortfall, her obligation to pay support would be a first charge on her estate.

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
CAROLINE MELIS
ApplicantCORNELIS JOHANNES ZWANENBURG
Respondent

ENDORSEMENT

Beaudoin J.
Released: May 15, 2017

CITATION: Melis v. Zwanenburg, 2017 ONSC 2847
COURT FILE NO.: FC-04-1974-1
DATE: 20170515

