CITATION: Minshall v. Minshall, 2017 ONSC 2952
COURT FILE NO.: 05-41/11
DATE: 20170512

BETWEEN:
MICHAEL MINSHALL, LESLIE BARKER and SHARON MINSHALL
Plaintiffs
-

and -

GREGORY SHAWN MINSHALL, PATRICK MINSHALL andBARABARA JOYCE MINSHALL in their capacity as Estate Trusteeof the Estate of Aubrey Wilson Minshall and AUBREY W.
MINSHALL HOLDINGS LIMITED, G.S. MINSHALL
HOLDINGS INC. and P. MINSHALL HOLDINGS INC.
DefendantsBEFORE:

F.L. Myers J.

COUNSEL: Bradley Phillips and David Wagner, counsel for the plaintiffs.
R.S.M. Woods and Iris Antonios, counsel for the defendants other than BarbaraJoyce Minshall.
Alex Zavaglia, counsel for the defendant Barbara Joyce Minshall.
HEARD:

May 1, 2, and 9, 2017
ENDORSEMENT

The Motions

[1]

The plaintiffs moved for:
a. an interim and final order removing Shawn, Patrick, and Barbara Minshall asestate trustees of the Estate of Aubrey Wilson Minshall;b. an interim and final order removing Shawn, Patrick, and Barbara Minshall astrustees of the spousal trust established pursuant to Aubrey Minshall’s will:

ONTARIO SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

- Page 2 c. an order appointing interim or final replacement trustees;

e. payment of their costs.

[2]

The defendants, other than Barbara Minshall, but with her support, cross-moved for:
a. an order dismissing this action for delay;b. in the alternative, for the imposition of another timetable for the action;c. an order that the non-resident plaintiffs post security for costs; andd. payment of their costs.

[3]
Since instructing counsel to bring the motion in late 2016, the plaintiffs Michael Minshalland Sharon Minshall have stopped participating in this proceeding. They are no longerrepresented. They do not respond to communications about the proceeding. They failed toappear at the hearing of their motion. By endorsement dated May 2, 2017, I dismissed the actionbrought by those two plaintiffs as abandoned and for delay. I reserved costs for this decision.

[4]

The sole remaining plaintiff is Leslie Barker.

[5]
For the reasons that follow, Ms. Barker’s motion is dismissed. The defendants’ motionfor dismissal for delay against Ms. Barker is dismissed. However, Ms. Barker is required to postsecurity for costs as set out below.
The Parties

[6]
Aubrey Minshall had five children - the three plaintiffs and the defendants Shawn andPatrick Minshall.

[7]
Barbara Joyce Minshall was Aubrey Minshall’s second wife. She is not the mother ofany of his five children.

[8]
The three plaintiffs all spent time estranged from their father although all had made someamends and had some relationship with him before his death. The three plaintiffs all live abroad.

[9]
The two defendant children, Patrick and Shawn Minshall, worked with their father in hisbusiness until his death.

[10] Aubrey Minshall died unexpectedly on November 23, 1994 shortly after his marriage toBarbara. His will created a spousal trust that made some arrangements for her. Aubrey left 10%

d. an interim or final order appointing a receiver over the assets and undertaking ofAubrey W. Minshall Holdings Limited; and

- Page 3 -

[11] After the death of Aubrey Minshall, with the approval of Revenue Canada, the partiesagreed to implement posthumously an estate freeze over his holding company Aubrey W.
Minshall Holdings Limited which is the subject matter of the underlying lawsuit. On the closingof the agreed upon estate freeze transactions in 1995, the plaintiffs each received cash ofapproximately $3.6 million on a tax fee basis. Their sole remaining interest is in 10% of thepreferred shares of Aubrey W. Minshall Holdings Limited each. The preferred shares are beingheld for the plaintiffs in the testamentary spousal trust. On the death of Barbara Minshall, thepreferred shares are to be redeemed by the holding company so that each plaintiff will becomeentitled to the additional sum of $6.37 million before tax.

[12] Sean, Patrick, and Barbara are the estate trustees of Aubrey’s estate. They are also thetrustees of the testamentary spousal trust. After the transactions mentioned above werecompleted, Shawn and Patrick became the directors and officers of Aubrey W. MinshallHoldings Limited and its sole common shareholders.
There is no Current Basis to Remove the Estate Trustees or the Trustees of the SpousalTrust

[13]

Radford v. Radford Estate, 2008 CarswellOnt 5297 (Ont. SCJ) Quinn J. summarized thefactors to be considered on an application to remove trustees as follows:
(1) the court should not lightly interfere with the discretion exercised by a person inchoosing the person or persons to act as his executors and trustees;
(2) interfering with the discretion and choice of a person in preparing his last will andtestament must not be not only well justified, but must amount to a case of clearnecessity;
(3) removal of an estate trustee should only occur on the clearest of evidence that there isno other course to follow;
(4) in deciding whether to remove an estate trustee, the court’s main guide should be thewelfare of the beneficiaries;
(5) it must be shown that the non-removal of the trustee will likely prevent the properexecution of the trust;
(6) the removal of an estate trustee is not intended to punish for past misconduct; rather,it is justified on the basis that past misconduct is likely to continue and that the estateassets and the interests of the beneficiaries must be protected. (see paras. 100-107)

of the residue of his estate to each of the three plaintiffs. The remaining 70% was to be sharedby Shawn and Patrick at 35% each.

[14] The plaintiffs make several allegations against Shawn, Patrick, and Barbara as trustees ofthe spousal trust, estate trustees, and as against Shawn and Patrick as directors and officers of theholding company. There is substantial overlap between the allegations made to support themotion to remove trustees and the substantive issues for trial in which breach of trust is overtlyin issue. I am disinclined to make interlocutory findings of fact or law on issues of misconductthat are issues for trial. The risk of inconsistent findings and duplicative proceedings is great. Inany event, given the view that I take of this matter, it is not necessary for me to make findings onthe contested allegations of past misconduct.

[15] Assuming, without deciding, that Ms. Barker was able to make out each of the allegationsof misconduct alleged, in my view there is no still reason to remove the estate trustees or thetrustees of the spousal trust pending trial or permanently.

[16] Cutting to the chase, the three plaintiffs’ sole remaining interests in their father’s estate isthat they are each entitled to receive $6.37 million before tax in cash on the death of BarbaraMinshall. The total funds required to pay all three plaintiffs’ claims is approximately $19.11
million (3 x $6.37 = $19.11). The funds are to be provided by the holding company redeemingpreferred shares being held for the plaintiffs in the spousal trust. The plaintiffs are thereforeconcerned to ensure that the holding company retains sufficient assets on Barbara’s death toallow it to fund the redemption of the spousal trust’s preferred shares to pay to the plaintiffs atthat time.

[17] Despite the past misconduct alleged, pursuant to the parties’ agreements, the holdingcompany owns a $25 million life insurance policy insuring Barbara’s life. Under the terms ofthe agreements among the parties, the proceeds of the insurance policy are to be held in trust topay taxes and the three plaintiffs’ entitlements. The evidence is that the best estimate of futuretaxes varies between $3 million and $11 million. At worst therefore, approximately $30 millionis required by the holding company to fund the plaintiffs $19.11 million plus $11 million intaxes.

[18] The insurance policy is funded by a cash deposit of approximately $2.5 million. Thedeposit should produce a return above the annual cost of the insurance so that the capital amountis likely to be preserved.

[19] In addition, pursuant to an order made by Whittaker J. on consent on June 18, 2012, thesum of $5.7 million is required to be held as security to ensure payment to Barbara of the annuitypayments to which she is due during her lifetime under the will. That amount too is not beingencroached upon but stands as security.

[20] In all therefore, there is already $25 million plus $2.5 million plus $5.7 million or $33.2
million available to fund the plaintiffs’ entitlement, plus taxes, plus Barbara’s annuity ifnecessary.

[21] In addition, the holding company also currently has another $24 million approximately inliquid and fixed assets. It does not carry on any active business at this time and has not since atleast the commencement of this litigation in 2011. Shawn and Patrick do take some annual

- Page 4 -

- Page 5 -

[22] The further $24 million in assets in the corporation provides a very substantial cushionthat is far above the amounts reasonably needed to secure the plaintiffs’ future entitlements. Theplaintiffs did not provide any evidence to establish a risk of greater taxes or other liabilitiescompeting for the assets in the holding company. While counsel postulated a fear of unknownfuture liabilities, the plaintiffs presented no evidence at all to establish that there is any air ofreality or reasonableness to those fears.

[23] In light of the fact that in the six-plus years since this litigation commenced far moremoney than is reasonably required to secure the plaintiffs’ future entitlement has been held bythe holding company, the defendants are not prepared to undertake to continue to hold the full
$24 million in perpetuity on top of the $33.2 million that is already being held. However, thedefendants Shawn and Patrick, on behalf of themselves, the holding company and their personalholding companies have undertaken:
a. not to remove cash from the insurance policy;b. to advise the plaintiffs in advance of any proposed changes that may be agreedupon with Barbara to the amount being held under the order made by Mr. JusticeWhittaker;c. to provide the plaintiffs with annual audited financial statements of the holdingcompany;d. to advise the plaintiffs in advance if the holding company decides to carry on anyactive business; ande. to advise the plaintiffs before undertaking any transaction or any number oftransactions involving a change in the current status of the corporation’s assets ofover $8 million in the aggregate. The number was designed to be large enough toallow the directors of the corporation flexibility with up to one-third of theremaining assets. They will give notice if they propose to affect the last twothirds of the assets of the holding company (or approximately $16 million) that iscurrently available as security over and above the $33.2 million that is alreadybeing held through the insurance policy and the order of Whittaker J referencedabove.

[24] There is a large cushion of money or assets that will remain idle under these undertakingsover and above the amount reasonably required under the best available evidence of the parties.
However, given Barbara’s current age, the money may need to be held for several decades beforethe redemption of the preferred shares occurs. The evidentiary record may change over time. Ifthe plaintiffs are given notice of proposed transactions that they fear may unreasonably erodetheir future economic safety or leave them at unreasonable risk, they will be free to oppose or togo to court as necessary and as they may be advised. In the meantime, in light of these

compensation from the remaining assets as they are entitled to do at corporate law (if notprevented by trust law).

- Page 6 undertakings, that are to be recited as orders of the court, there is no current basis to find that thespousal trust or the estate of Aubrey Minshall may not perform their obligations to the plaintiffswhatever historic misconduct might have been proven against the defendants, if any.
It follows from the discussion above that I do not find that misconduct, if any, is likely tocontinue or that there is any need to remove trustees or estate trustees in order to protect theassets of the estate or the interests of the beneficiaries. More than enough assets are frozen orbeing carefully monitored to protect the limited and fixed interests of the plaintiffs.

[25]

- Page 7 Oppression Remedy and Receivership

[27] First, they say that Shawn and Patrick acted in conflict of interest, mademisrepresentations, and bullied them into agreeing to limit their inheritance to the cash paymentsand promise of future cash through the redeemable pref. shares discussed above. The structurearose through a series of agreements that culminated in a final agreement in 1995 referred to asthe 3rd variation agreement. For this cause of action I do not need to make findings on whetherany of the defendants acted in breach of their duties as trustee or committed any other precontractual breaches of obligations. It is only conduct regarding the holding company that is thesubject matter of the oppression remedy under s. 248 (2)(a) to (c) of the OBCA. The oppressionremedy is not concerned with the efforts by the trustees and beneficiaries to engage in the estatefreeze that initially provided the common shares to Shawn and Patrick and cash and redeemablepref. shares to the plaintiffs. These transactions were conducted at the shareholder level thatpreceded and created the parties’ corporate interests. They are not corporate acts concerning themanagement or affairs of the corporation that fall within s. 248.

[28] Moreover, even if the oppression remedy were engaged, the plaintiffs had independentlegal advice, independent accounting advice, independent business valuation advice, and morethan ample opportunities to protect themselves or reject the estate freeze had they wished to doso. Even if Shawn and Patrick undervalued corporate assets, the plaintiffs in hand their ownvaluation showing a higher value. Ms. Barkers’ professed lack of memory and her unwillingnessto cooperate while under cross-examination leaves her with no real evidence to rebut the paperrecord and the recollections of her brothers. The evidence that is available shows that theplaintiffs’ accountants and valuators were engaged fully and provided advice to the plaintiffs asto how to cash out their interests tax efficiently including advising that the values being proposedwere possibly low by as much as $30 million (or almost 50% of the value propounded by Shawnand Patrick). The plaintiffs negotiated through their professionals on those bases.

[29] I say nothing about whether Shawn and Patrick violated any duties as trustee or estatetrustee leading up to the closing of the 3 rd variation agreement that created the shareholdingstructure. But nothing that they did leading up to the implementation of the share structure in1995 can be seen to be oppressive under the Business Corporations Act as the plaintiffs werefully and capably advised and had every opportunity to protect themselves. The time pressureimposed at the outset in 1994 was due to existing tax deadlines that had to be met. Regardless ofthe short time frame involved, the plaintiffs obtained independent advice from their counsel andtheir accountants before first agreeing to the outlines of the estate freeze. The threats made in1995 were in response to anticipatory breaches of prior agreements threatened by Ms. Barker.
Ms. Barker’s change of position was rejected not only by Shawn and Patrick but by the two otherplaintiffs as well. The myriad of professional advice and active, arms length negotiations amongthe parties and their professionals belie Ms. Barker’s bald and unsupported suggestion ofeconomic duress in any event.

[26] As part of the grounds to remove the trustees and to support the appointment of a receiverto hold the assets of the holding company, the plaintiffs rely on the oppression remedy under theBusiness Corporations Act. They make two broad claims.

- Page 8 -

[31] Sean and Patrick are the sole common shareholders. There breached no corporate law inselling a corporate asset or in declaring dividends on their common shares. Moreover, the 3rdvariation agreement provides limits on when dividends can be declared and it provides for noticeif the corporate assets fall beneath a fixed floor value. These provisions were negotiated by theplaintiffs and Barbara to protect their future entitlements under the 3 rd variation agreement. Thesale of Spacemaker and subsequent dividends did not offend the contractual protections.

[32] In her factum, Ms. Barker asserts three broadly worded reasonable expectations that shesays were offended by the sale of Spacemaker and the subsequent dividend. First, she says shereasonably expected that Shawn and Patrick would preserve and enhance the value of thecompany beyond the value it had at the closing of the estate freeze. Second, she says shereasonably expected that Shawn and Patrick would provide timely disclosure of any materialdecrease in the net realizable value of the assets of the holding company or its subsidiaries.
Third, she says that she reasonably expected that the trustees, Shawn, Patrick , and Barbarawould oversee operations of the holding company to protect the interests of all of thebeneficiaries of the spousal trust (i.e. to protect the future redemption of the pref. shares beingheld in the trust).

[33] There is no basis upon which Ms. Barker can say that she subjectively held the first twoexpectations or, if she did, that they were reasonably held. The 3 rd variation agreement speaksdirectly to both of them. Any enhancement of the value of the company after implementation ofthe estate freeze under the 3rd variation agreement is expressly for the benefit of Shawn andPatrick as the common shareholders. There is a term preventing dividends taking the companybelow the frozen value. As noted above, that term was not breached by the sale of Spacemakerand the subsequent dividend. Similarly, the 3 rd variation agreement required annual disclosure tothe plaintiffs of a certificate showing that the assets of the holding company were worth morethan a fixed floor. That was the negotiated disclosure. There is no basis for the plaintiffs tosubjectively expect different or more disclosure. Nor would such an expectation be reasonablein light of the express contractual disclosure agreement.1

1

Among the plaintiffs’ complaints is that Shawn and Patrick failed to make timely disclosure ten or so years laterwhen the company’s value did fall below the floor value. That is not part of the Spacemaker sale and dividendissue. In any event, the plaintiffs were given disclosure of the financial statements within one year of the company’svalue falling below the agreed fixed floor value. They cannot show that the brief delay cause them any loss or to actany differently than they otherwise acted. The 3rd variation agreement gives the plaintiffs the right to an accountingif the floor value is breached. The plaintiffs are advancing that right in this p roceeding.

[30] The second basis for the plaintiffs’ oppression claim is that shortly after the closing of theestate freeze in 1995, Shawn and Patrick commenced discussions that led to the sale of one of theactive businesses owned by the holding company called Spacemaker Limited. The sale closed in1997 at a price far above the prior valuation. Shawn and Patrick ultimately took over $25
million from the holding company essentially pocketing the value of Spacemaker.

[34] As to oversight of the corporation by the trustees of the spousal trust and the estatetrustees, that is not a corporate matter at all. As beneficial owners of 30% of the pref. shares,complaints about oversight by the trustees are not complaints about the management of theaffairs of the corporation. It concerns the carrying out by trustees of their duties to theirbeneficiaries. That is not the subject of an oppression remedy. If the plaintiffs have concernsabout the conflicts of interest of Shawn and Patrick as trustees and estate trustees and Barbara’salleged abdication of her responsibilities, those are issues for trial.

[35] Finally, in her recent cross-examination, Ms. Barker advanced a new expectation that isnot pleaded or submitted in her factum. She says that the estate trustees could have sold thebusiness and just paid the beneficiaries their inheritances in 1993 or 1994. The point of theestate freeze agreed upon by the beneficiaries was to continue their father’s legacy operating andgrowing the family business. The plaintiffs agreed to take some cash then and to defer the rest ata fixed value until later only because Shawn and Patrick convinced them that they wanted tokeep the business intact and run it as their father would have wanted.

[36] As a consequence of there being no estate freeze in place when Aubrey Minshall died,very substantial capital gains taxes became due. Paying the tax would have required sale ofassets or the company undertaking substantial indebtedness. Both of these outcomes wereundesirable to the children. It is clear in the evidence that at the time that their father passedaway unexpectedly, he was working on an estate freeze with his professional advisors. Hepresciently signed a will shortly before he married Barbara to put something in place to protecther in the interim. But he knew that his will would have to change when the estate freeze wasimplemented.

[37] Ms. Barker argues that the whole point of the siblings agreeing to an estate freeze afterthe father died was to let Shawn and Patrick carry on their father’s legacy. Their near immediatesale of a major piece of the business and pocketing of the value violates that reasonableexpectation and undermines the entire basis for the estate freeze.

[38] There is much hindsight in this claim. It is perfectly clear in the evidence that theplaintiffs did not want to be part of the business either before their father died or going forward.
The plaintiffs had their accountants review the structures proposed by Shawn and Patrick toprovide the plaintiffs with proposals to cash out. Although Shawn and Patrick did getapproached by a buyer shortly after the estate freeze closed, the sale actually took two years tonegotiate and close. The plaintiffs now like the enhanced value of the assets obtained by Shawnand Patrick in that sale compared to the lower valuation they agreed to two years earlier. Thatvaluation was based on the value of the business when their father died another year before that.
However the evidence is clear and unchallenged that the company went through a verysignificant period of growth and prosperity in those three years to the point that it was flush withcash and inventory and it had very low liabilities. There was nothing untoward under corporatelaw about the sale and dividend.

[39] Ms. Barker argues that Shawn and Patrick did not disclose that they had been contactedby the buyer of Spacemaker prior to the closing of the estate freeze and they artificially

- Page 9 -

- Page 10 -

[40] Did the sale violate a reasonable expectation that Shawn and Patrick would carry on theirfather’s legacy? As phrased, the expectation is almost meaningless. The plaintiffs did notprovide any evidence that Aubrey have held all of his assets even if presented with a verylucrative opportunity to sell one. All that the plaintiffs really have is a smell that they say waftsfrom the fact that the contact with the buyer followed the closing of the estate freeze by just afew weeks. So, that begs the question of whether there is a reasonable expectation created by theestate freeze that Shawn and Patrick would not sell assets or pocket profit after the estate freezeclosed? I do not see how that can be so subjectively or objectively.

[41] Shortly after the siblings agreed to elements of the estate freeze, Mr. Milne, counsel forthe plaintiffs wrote to the defendants’ counsel and discussed the terms of the deal. First he notedthat the plaintiffs were to receive cash on closing. Shawn and Patrick were not going to receiveany up-front cash or at that time. The plaintiffs’ counsel recited their understanding that Shawnand Patrick would be the sole common shareholders of the corporation going forward. Theywould be entitled to exercise “unfettered control” over the company with no minorityshareholders to interfere with them. He recited that as the common shareholders, Shawn andPatrick would enjoy 100% of the growth of the business. The preferred shares in the family trustwould not have any dividend rights.

[42] Those were the key takeaways according to the plaintiffs’ lawyer. Shawn and Patrickbargained for unfettered control, all future growth, and no dividend drain on the cash flow of thecompany. All that had to be protected was the future redemption of the preferred shares onBarbara’s death. The funding of that event was protected by the insurance policy on Barbara’slife, the annual reporting on the fixed floor value of the company’s assets, and the prohibition ondividends if paying them would reduce the company’s value effectively below the frozen valueof the preferred shares. The expectation now claimed by Ms. Barker – that the Shawn andPatrick were not entitled to sell Spacemaker or to declare the dividends to themselves - are indirect conflict with her counsel’s contemporaneous description of the business terms of the deal.
In return for cash up front and a fixed cash interest at the back end, the plaintiffs were leaving thefuture of the company totally to Shawn and Patrick. The plaintiffs did not want their fortunes tobe pinned to the future success of the company or, presumably, to their brothers’ success asmanagers. The plaintiffs wanted and agreed to take fixed cash interests protected under the 3rdvariation agreement. They then washed their hands of their father’s business.

[43] No one wanted to incur unnecessary tax payments when Aubrey Minshall died. It was inall of the siblings’ interests to defer and minimize the tax. Telling the tax man that a purpose ofthe estate freeze was to keep the business in family hands was truthful. It is disingenuous to relyon that statement now to somehow turn the whole deal on its head and suggest that the plaintiffshad any interest at all in the ongoing business or what Shawn or Patrick did with it after beingpaid their up-front cash and ensuring that their future fixed cash interest was secured in theagreed upon manner.

suppressed the value of the company by doing so. This really goes to the pre-contractual trustissues rather than to oppression in the management or affairs of the corporation.

- Page 11 -

a.

Reasonable expectations are found first in formal corporate documentation; and

b. Parties cannot have a reasonable expectation of a matter for which they had everyopportunity to protect themselves by contract.

[46] Both propositions apply here.
The parties all had highly sophisticated lawyers,accountants, and valuators who were engaged for a long period of time. The deal terms set theexpectations. There is an entire agreement clause in the 3rd variation agreement which shouldhave brought home to all parties that if they had matters of importance on which they relied,those matters were to be spelled out in the written agreement. In any event, the question of howto protect the plaintiffs’ future entitlements was expressly the subject of significant negotiationsand is indeed spelled out with clarity and specificity in the 3 rd variation agreement. If theplaintiffs wanted to prevent Shawn and Patrick from realizing on excess value that accrued tothem as common shareholders after the estate freeze, they had every opportunity to put that pointinto the agreement. It is not there because the parties did not agree to it. In fact, they agreed tothe opposite as described by the plaintiffs’ own lawyers.

[47] Although not phrased as a motion for summary judgment, all parties agreed to the matterbeing determined summarily as provided by Rule 20.04 (2)(b). The plaintiffs make no referenceat all to the court’s authority to make interim orders under s. 246 (4) of the BusinessCorporations Act. They treated this matter as a final order. It is clear to me that there is nofurther evidence that is likely to be adduced at trial on oppression. Two plaintiffs have goneaway. Leslie’s evidence on cross-examination so limited her memory that she is not capable ofproviding any credible evidence going to the substance of the oppression claim even were she totestify at the trial. The deal documents speak for themselves and are the key component of anoppression claim. Accordingly, I am satisfied that I can apply the law to the facts and that doingso will provide a fair process in the interest of justice.

[48] Finally on this point, in light of the protections already in place for the remaining assetsof the corporation, I see no basis to appoint a receiver over the company’s assets or undertakingin any event. The plaintiffs’ request is especially inequitable as the full costs would effectivelybe foisted on Shawn and Patrick because the plaintiffs’ have a fixed dollar interest. Theplaintiffs did not even offer to bear the costs for the extra protection that they sought for theirown interests. They also not have a proposed receiver in place at the hearing of the motion. Itwas only when the hearing resumed on May 9, 2017, after the defendants had pointed out theplaintiffs’ failure, that the plaintiffs came forward in reply with a receiver’s consent to serve.

[49] Were the matter being dealt with on an interlocutory basis, I would have much troublefinding a serious issue to be tried on oppression in light of the plain meaning of the 3rd variation

[44] In exchange for substantial amounts of money, the plaintiffs decidedly and deliberatedleft the future growth of the business to Shawn and Patrick. They cannot now reasonablypropose an expectation that Shawn and Patrick were not entitled to enjoy that growth.

- Page 12 deal discussedprofessional toor to exercisemillion in value

[50] While there may be issues regarding whether the sale of Spacemaker, the declaration ofdividends, and subsequent corporate distributions to Shawn and Patrick while the company’sfortunes faded though the 2000’s amounted to a conflict of interest or other breach of trustees’Dismissal for Delay

[51] This action commenced as two related applications and proceeded apace until mediationin 2013. The plaintiffs have let it languish since then. There has been no downside to them inconserving fees while the corporate assets are effectively tied up. While Justice Whittaker liftedthe freeze order and this let Patrick and Shawn repay the balance of the outstandingshareholders’ loans to themselves, the bulk of the remaining assets consist of realty or liquidassets that can and have sat more or less idle.

[52] In the past three years there have apparently been some settlement negotiations. I wasnot favoured with any details as to how three years of delay can be accounted for by baldreferences to ongoing talks. Moreover, during that time, the court ordered deadline for settingthis action down for trial has passed. The plaintiffs have not moved to amend that deadlinedespite their longstanding breach.

[53] Having said that, the delay, while inordinate, has not been contumelious. Ms. Barker hasestablished that no evidence has been lost during the period. The vast bulk of the trial evidenceis already in evidence in the 17 affidavits filed and the many cross-examinations held to date.
While some valuator’s files are unavailable and one of the original counsel is no longer able totestify, that happened previously and not as a result of the recent delay.

[54]

The presumption of prejudice on a three year delay is weak.

[55] The lack of memory displayed by Ms. Barker on her cross-examination is not prejudiceto the defendants. If anything, it helps them tactically.

[56] Although the Rule 24 test is met by rebutting the weak presumption of prejudice, in myview the plaintiff should not be entitled to continue unless she can also meet the test to amend

agreement and in light of Mr. Milne’s description of the plaintiffs’ take on theabove. Moreover, it is neither just nor convenient to appoint an expensivesuperintend an insurance policy and two deposits that will just sit for decadesbusiness judgment as to any proposed uses of some portion of the additional $24
that remains available over and above the base amount required today.

- Page 13 -

the scheduling order. Scheduling orders are not to be ignored. If civil actions are to be efficientand affordable, they cannot be left to languish in interlocutory limbo. Here two plaintiffs havealready withdrawn. Perhaps it is time to put this case to an end.

- Page 14 -

[39]
In deciding whether to set aside a dismissal order, the Court of Appeal hasmade it clear that a contextual approach must be taken by the court, namely onethrough which it must “consider and weigh all relevant factors to determine the orderthat is just in the circumstances of the particular case”; see Sciani v. Prochnicki, 2007O.J. No. 2365 at paragraph 41: whether the explanation for the delay is adequate;whether there was inadvertence (by the plaintiffs or their lawyer) in missing thedeadline in question; whether the motion to set aside the dismissal order was broughtpromptly; and whether the defendants have suffered no significant prejudice onaccount of the delay.

[40]ONCA 871 (Ont. C.A.) at paragraph 9.

[58] In this case the explanation for the delay (settlement talks) is weak but not non-existent. I
attribute to counsel the failure to request an extension of time among the relief sought in thenotice of motion. The client cannot be expected to know how to treat expired scheduling orderswhen other relief is being sought on the merits. The defendants have suffered no significantprejudice as previously discussed. Moreover, while I am quite sure that these motions were illfounded, I am not satisfied that there is no merit to the issues raised concerning the trustees’
conduct leading up to the 3rd variation agreement or thereafter. Shawn and Patrick were adversein interest to the plaintiffs during negotiations. I was not shown any evidence to indicate that astrustees, they took steps to ensure the independence and even hand of the trust and estate. Noram I clear on whether as trustees, Shawn, Patrick and Barbara had some further duties to alert theplaintiffs or to take some other steps as the value of the holding company declined. While I havefound that the plaintiffs’ interests are more than adequately secured now, the path to get to thatpoint was circuitous and difficult. There are issues for a trial. No doubt, defences are beingadvanced. In my view it is in the interests of justice that the matter proceeds to trial to end thisaction as efficiently as is reasonably possible.
Security for Costs is Required

[59] While this matter should be resolved at trial, I cannot ignore that the plaintiff is a nonresident of Canada. Her interest in the spousal trust is defeasible should she pass away before

- Page 15 -

[60] This has been a very expensive proceeding. The initial affidavits, prior to the conversionof the original applications to an action, were extensive and detailed. The motions before me areas telling in their practical meaning as their legal. In my view, with the co-plaintiffs fallingaway, unwilling to invest more time or money, and Ms. Barker’s husband apparently no longerwilling to see parts of his funds used further on this endeavour, this motion appears to have beena last ditch effort by Ms. Barker to get the best parts of her case before a judge to try to findsome relief before the cost of a trial forces her to back away as well. This is not idle speculationas Ms. Barker’s evidence is that she cannot afford to invest further in the case. However, it ismost telling that she refused to produce the detailed financial evidence required to establish thatshe is “impecunious” as a defence to a motion for security for costs. Without proper financialdisclosure to establish the plaintiff’s impecuniosity, I do not reach the question of whether anapparently meritorious claim is being unfairly stopped in its tracks.

[61] If this then is Ms. Barker’s last hurrah because she cannot or will not afford to pay moreas she says, then it is all the more important to order that security for costs be posted. Part of therules of litigating in Ontario is that an unsuccessful party can be expected to be ordered to bear asignificant portion of the successful party’s legal fees and disbursements. A foreign plaintiffwith no assets in the jurisdiction is presumptively required to post security for this outcome toensure that if the local defendants succeed the plaintiff will not be able to retreat behind foreignborders to avoid the costs obligation that she undertook in putting our process in motion. That isperhaps somewhat less of a concern in this case as the courts of the State of Texas and all of theUnited States of America give full faith and credit to judgments of this court as we stand willingand routinely do for them. However there is still an expense and inconvenience to the process ofchasing an unsuccessful litigant abroad that led our Rules Committee to require foreign plaintiffswho wish to take advantage of our court system to post security to ensure that they comply withall of the rules and not just the ones that favour them.

[62] Ms. Barker argues that there can be no security for costs of an oppression proceeding. AsI have dismissed that proceeding, the OBCA is no longer an issue. In any event, even if theoppression application continued, it is plainly just an add-on to what is essentially a trust case. Itwas added after the proceedings commenced and simply was a way to seek relief against theholding company directly as an alternative to trying to exercise shareholder control over theassets of the company from the estate or spousal trust level. The reasonable expectations piece isa readily severable from the bulk of the issues in the case as discussed above. The bulk of thepleadings and the issues for trial are standard estates court fare that do not involve oppression. Inmy view, security for costs would therefore be available even if the oppression proceedingcontinued. I would make a small adjustment to recognize that costs associated with that onecause of action are immune from the requirement to post security.

[63] I am not prepared at this stage to set the full amount of security for costs. It is clear thatthis has been an expensive case to date and a trial will be no less expensive. If Ms. Barker is

Barbara. Therefore that interest cannot count as an asset in the jurisdiction that will be availableto pay her costs. In any event, the interest may not be exigible for more than 20 years. It is notan asset that is available to satisfy a costs order that may be made in the near term.

- Page 16 prepared to commit to the case, then the quantum can be fine-tuned as the case moves closer totrial.

[64] Ms. Barker’s motion is dismissed. The defendants’ motion for dismissal for delay isdismissed. Order to go in Form 56A requiring the plaintiff Leslie Barker to post $100,000 on orbefore June 30, 2017 as the first installment of security for the costs of the defendants. Theaction is stayed under Rule 56.05 until that time. If Ms. Barker posts the security as ordered, theparties shall arrange a case conference before me to schedule the remaining steps to move thisaction to trial and to discuss any further installment of security for costs.
Costs

[65] The defendants may deliver no more than five pages of costs submissions plus their costsoutlines and any offers to settle on which they rely by May 19, 2017. Ms. Barker may deliver nomore than five pages of submissions plus her costs outline and any offers to settle on which sherelies by May 26, 2017. All documents shall be delivered as searchable PDF attachments to anemail to my Assistant. There shall be no authorities or legislative material filed. Rather, anyreferences to case law or to statutory material shall be presented as hyperlinks embedded in theparty’s submissions.

F.L. Myers J.

Date: May 12, 2017

Order

