ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETW EEN:

Beverly Mole and Darryl Mole
Plaintiffs )
- and )
Dr. Stuart Manwell
Defendant )

John A. Tamming, for the Plaintiffs

Andrea H. Plumb and Kelly C.
Tranquilli, for the Defendant

HEARD: May 29, 2017

REASONS FOR DECISION
Conlan J.
I.

Introduction

The Nature of the Proceeding

[1]

This is a medical negligence case.

[2]

The Plaintiffs, patient Beverly Mole (“Beverly”) and her son Darryl Mole

(collectively the “Moles”), have sued Dr. Stuart Manwell (“Manwell”).

CITATION: Mole and Mole v. Manwell, 2017 ONSC 3357
COURT FILE NO.: CV14-065
DATE: 20170530

-2-

[3]

The trial, by jury, is set to start in Owen Sound on Monday, June 5,

are (i) informed consent, (ii) whether Manwell was negligent, and (iii) causation.

[4]

On September 24, 2013, Beverly underwent surgery performed by

Manwell at the hospital in Owen Sound. The procedure was a left total knee jointreplacement.

[5]

Unfortunately, Beverly was injured during the procedure.

Due to

complications from the vascular injury to her popliteal artery, on September 30 th,Beverly had to endure an above-knee amputation of her left leg.

[6]

In March 2014, the Statement of Claim was issued, alleging that there

was a lack of informed consent to the surgery and that Manwell performed theoperation negligently.
The Motions

[7]

On May 29, 2017, this Court heard two Motions.

[8]

The Moles move for an Order restricting Manwell to calling one expert

witness at trial.

[9]

The Moles are concerned that they will be prejudiced if the relief that

they seek is not granted. They argue that for Manwell to be permitted to call morethan one expert witness at trial would result in redundancy. Finally, they submit thattwo of the proposed experts to be called at trial by Manwell, Drs. James Waddell
(“Waddell”) and Hugh Cameron (“Cameron”), are the authors of reports that wereserved late as per the Rules of Civil Procedure.

2017. Damages have been agreed upon. Liability is disputed. The issues for trial

-3-

The Moles have one expert witness – Dr. Joseph Schatzker

(“Schatzker”).

Manwell has three proposed expert witnesses – Dr. J. Rod Davey

(“Davey”), Waddell and Cameron.

[11]

All four experts are orthopaedic surgeons, as is Manwell.

[12]

Manwell moves for an Order precluding Schatzker from testifying at trial

about a modified surgical technique for total knee joint replacement as firstdiscussed in Schatzker’s report dated January 26, 2016.

[13]

Alternatively, if Schatzker is allowed to give that testimony at trial, then

Manwell requests that he be permitted to call as witnesses at trial all three of hisproposed experts – Davey, Waddell and Cameron.

[14]

In the further alternative, if Schatzker is allowed to give that testimony

at trial, Manwell requests that he be permitted to call Davey as an expert witness attrial, plus Waddell and Cameron but as “fact witnesses” only.

[15]

Manwell submits that Schatzker’s evidence regarding the modified

surgical technique is too novel and not sufficiently reliable, and hence, inadmissible.
Further, its limited probative value is outweighed by its significant prejudicial effect.

[16]

With regard to his first alternative relief sought, Manwell argues that a

fair trial of the issues may not be possible without enabling him to call all three of hisproposed expert witnesses.
The Expert Evidence in a Nutshell

[17]

The materials filed on the Motions are voluminous, necessarily so,

because they contain all of the reports from all four experts.

[18]

Schatzker is the author of four reports dated November 13, 2014,

January 26, 2016, April 6, 2016 and December 16, 2016.

[10]

-4-

[19]

His penultimate opinion, as first expressed in his November 2014

he performed the surgery on Beverly.

[20]

In his January 26, 2016 report, Schatzker opines that, although

Manwell used an accepted technique for the surgical procedure, because Beverlywas obese, a modified technique ought to have been employed.

The final

paragraph of the said report reads as follows:
In my view, Dr. Davey argues that Dr. Manwell used an acceptedtechnique and in this he is correct but for the fact that Dr. Manwell shouldhave recognized that he was operating on an obese patient. This patienthad a long standing flexion and varus deformity of the knee. In such apatient, the technique had to be modified to protect the artery during thebone cut of the tibial and this was only possible if one made a medial andposteromedial release prior to the cut. This had to be done to make itpossible to insert a retractor as a guard for the advancing saw blade.

[21]

Davey is the author of numerous reports with the following dates: May

14, 2015, July 15, 2015, March 31, 2016, April 13, 2016, May 11, 2016 andFebruary 23, 2017.

[22]

Davey’s opinion, as first expressed in his May 2015 report, is that

Manwell was competent and was not responsible for any injury to Beverly.

[23]

Waddell is the author of three reports dated April 5, 2016, March 20,

2017 and March 23, 2017.

[24]

Waddell’s opinion, as first expressed in his April 2016 report, is that

Manwell did not fall below the standard of care.

[25]
27, 2017.

Cameron is the author of two reports dated March 24, 2016 and March

report, is that Manwell fell short of the prevailing standard of care in the way in which

[26]

Cameron’s opinion is that Manwell was not negligent.

[27]

Succinctly put, none of Davey, Waddell and Cameron is in agreement

with Schatzker about the modified surgical technique. To say the least, the threeproposed expert witnesses to be called at trial by Manwell are all somewhatmystified by Schatzker’s evidence on this issue.

As Davey put it in one of his

reports – “I don’t know of any literature that would agree with Dr. Schatzker’srecommendation”.
The Issues

[28]

There are only two issues to decide on these Motions:

(i) should

Schatzker be permitted to testify at trial about the modified surgical technique, and
(ii) if so, what is the result, either (a) Manwell is limited to calling one expert witnessat trial, or (b) Manwell may call all three of his expert witnesses, or (c) perhapsManwell may call two of them, or (d) Manwell may call Davey as an expert witnessand the other two, Waddell and Cameron, as fact witnesses.
II.

Analysis

[29]

I begin by noting that I recognize the importance of my decision on

these Motions. It is common ground that, in terms of negligence, the Moles’ caseturns on the anticipated evidence of Schatzker with regard to the modified surgicaltechnique.

[30]

In other words, bluntly stated, unless the Moles are prepared to run a

trial solely on the issue of informed consent, a decision to prevent Schatzker fromtestifying about the modified surgical technique may be akin to granting summaryjudgment in favour of Manwell.

-5-

-6-

[31]

So be it. I cannot in good conscience dismiss the primary relief being

law is the law.

The General Test for the Admissibility of Expert Opinion Evidence

[32]

The test for admissibility of expert evidence is well settled.

[33]

Although the issue is before this Court by virtue of Manwell’s Motion,

the burden of proof is on the Moles to demonstrate, on a balance of probabilities,that the proposed evidence is admissible.

[34]

There is nothing improper about the Court making this determination in

the absence of a full voir dire which includes live testimony. Often, as here, theadmissibility decision is based on written materials which include an exhaustiveoutline of all of the proposed expert evidence on both sides.

[35]

Opinion evidence is generally inadmissible; expert opinion may be an

exception in certain circumstances. R. v. Abbey (2009), 246 C.C.C. (3d) 301 (Ont.
C.A.), at paragraph 71.

[36]

There are four basic requirements for the admission of expert

evidence: (i) it must be relevant, (ii) it must be necessary to assist the trier of fact,
(iii) it must not be the subject of any exclusionary rule, and (iv) it must be adducedthrough a properly qualified expert.

R. v. Mohan (1994), 89 C.C.C. (3d) 402

(S.C.C.), at pages 411-415.

[37]

To establish logical relevance, one may ask whether the tendered

evidence makes the proposition at issue more likely to be than if that tendered

sought by Manwell simply because it may result in no day in Court for Beverly. The

-7-

evidence was absent. R. v. J. (J.-L.) (2000), 148 C.C.C. (3d) 487 (S.C.C.), at page

[38]

Logical relevance is not enough, however, as legal relevance must also

be established.

This involves an assessment of the probative value versus the

prejudicial effect. Put another way, a cost-benefit analysis must be undertaken. TheCourt may consider the extent to which the proposed expert evidence is groundedon proven facts, the extent to which it supports the inference sought to be madefrom it, the extent to which it relates to something actually at issue in the case, thereliability of the evidence, its complexity and whether it might distort the fact-findingprocess, and the extent to which the evidence is controversial. R. v. K.(A.) (1999),137 C.C.C. (3d) 225 (Ont. C.A.), at paragraphs 77-89.

[39]

As can be seen, the Court has an important gatekeeper role. It is not

sufficient for the party tendering the proposed expert evidence to argue that it wouldbe helpful. Helpfulness is not enough.

[40]

Although reliability, per se, is not listed as one of the factors in Mohan,

supra, threshold reliability may affect all of those factors. R. v. F.(D.S.) (1999), 132
C.C.C. (3d) 97 (Ont. C.A.), at page 110.

[41]

As for necessity, as indicated above, mere helpfulness is not enough.

The expert must provide information likely outside the experience and knowledge ofthe trier of fact. Mohan, supra, at pages 413-414.

[42]

Put another way, the necessity requirement is met where it can be said

that lay persons are apt to come to the wrong conclusion without expert assistance,or where access to important information will be lost unless the trier of fact borrowsfrom the expert evidence.
paragraphs 46-56.

R. v. D.(D.) (2000), 148 C.C.C. (3d) 41 (S.C.C.), at

507.

-8-

[43]

On whether the proposed expert evidence is the subject of an

into the ultimate issue to be decided by the trier of fact.

[44]

We know for certain that there is no outright rule that proposed expert

evidence is inadmissible if it goes to the ultimate issue in the case.

R. v. Burns

(1994), 89 C.C.C. (3d) 193 (S.C.C.), at page 201; R. v. Bryan, [2003] O.J. No. 1960
(C.A.), at paragraphs 14-18.

[45]

We also know for certain that the closer the proposed evidence comes

to the ultimate issue to be decided, the stricter the scrutiny of that evidence willgenerally be. Mohan, supra, at pages 413-414; J.(J.-L.), supra, at paragraph 37.

[46]

The prohibition against the admission of expert evidence that goes to

the ultimate issue to be decided is not, today, absolute (if it ever was), but it may stillbe an important factor in deciding to exclude, or curtail in its scope, the proposedexpert evidence. R. v. Lucas, [2009] O.J. No. 5330 (Sup. Ct.), at paragraph 4.

[47]

Courts, particularly since the Supreme Court of Canada decided R. v.

Sekhon, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 272, have been careful to not ignore the dangersassociated with the admission of expert evidence.

[48]

As for the need for a properly qualified expert, it is not expected that

the proposed expert be the most qualified, whether through experience orknowledge or both.

[49]

That someone else may be more qualified goes to weight and not to

admissibility.

[50]

What is required is that the proposed expert possess special or

peculiar knowledge that goes beyond that of the trier of fact.

Mohan, supra, at

exclusionary rule, there is some controversy as to how far the evidence can intrude

-9-

pages 414-415; R. v. Thomas (2006), 207 C.C.C. (3d) 86 (Ont. Sup. Ct.), at

Some Commentary on Novel Expert Evidence

[51]

There is no dispute here that Schatzker’s evidence regarding the

modified surgical technique is novel.

[52]

Davey, a highly experienced and well-regarded orthopaedic surgeon

and associate professor at University of Toronto’s department of surgery, in hisMarch 31, 2016 report, stated that he was not aware of any literature/references thatwould support Schatzker’s opinion (pages 4 and 6).

[53]

Waddell, an orthopaedic surgeon and professor of surgery with 100-

150 knee replacement surgeries per annum under his belt, in his April 5, 2016
report, stated that the issue of obesity is largely irrelevant (page 5). Remember thereference to obesity in Schatzker’s January 26, 2016 report.

[54]

More specifically, in his March 20, 2017 report, Waddell, who teaches

surgical trainees the technical aspects of knee replacement surgery, stated that hehas never used the modified surgical technique referred to by Schatzker, is notaware of other surgeons using the said technique, is not aware of any reference tothe said technique anywhere in the literature, has never seen it performed, hasnever heard of its recommendation, and considers it to be dangerous (pages 2 and3).

[55]

Cameron, an orthopaedic surgeon who has been performing knee

replacements since the mid-1970s, 4000 or 5000 operations in total, in his March24, 2016 report, stated that he had no idea what Schatzker is talking about (page 4).

paragraph 18.

- 10 -

[56]

I adopt the following submissions made by counsel for Manwell at

terms of the state of the law pertaining to novel scientific evidence:
24.

25.

The Honourable Stephen T. Goudge has cautioned that the judgemust bear the heavy burden of being the ultimate gatekeeper inprotecting the legal system from unreliable expert evidence. Suchevidence can contribute to miscarriages of justice. The Ministry ofthe Attorney General appointed Justice Goudge as Commissionerof the Inquiry into Pediatric Forensic Pathology in Ontario toconduct a systemic review of the circumstances that allowed theopinions of forensic pathologist Dr. Charles Smith to be acceptedas expert evidence where, among other issues, there was noreliable scientific basis for many of his opinions. As a result of thissystemic review, Justice Goudge made a number ofrecommendations to restore public confidence in the legal system.
In particular, Charter 18 of the “Goudge Report” addressed the roleof the trial judge in protecting the legal system from the effects offlawed scientific evidence.

In summary, the Goudge Report made the following observations andrecommendations in respect of the expert and novel scientific theory:
(a)

an important exclusionary rule is that evidence that lacks sufficientthreshold credibility should not be admitted;

(b)

novel science is a particular example where the reliability of thepurported science from which the expert opinion is drawn will needto be evaluated;

(c)

evidence-based expert evidence is required to establish therequisite reliability; not purported evidence based only on personalexperience;

(d)

expert evidence should be subjected to the critical methodologicalanalysis adopted by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. J.-L.J.

(e)

bald assertion of conclusory opinions, dogmatism and a failure toengage with the relevant literature all raise concerns regarding alack of threshold reliability. The jurisprudence is clear that carefulreview of such expert opinions on this basis is required to avoid thedanger of a jury simply accepting expert evidence of a “witness of

paragraphs 24 through 27 of their Factum, none of which is disputed by the Moles in

- 11 -

(f)

26.

tools to determine the threshold reliability of expert opinion include:
(i)

whether there exists an acceptable body of evidence oracceptance of the theory to objectively validate the opinion;

(ii)

the existence of peer review of the theory or technique;

(iii)

the existence of publication; and

(iv)

recognition or acceptance in the relevant scientific field.

Justice Goudge allowed that in determining whether there issufficient threshold reliability to justify the admission of expertevidence, one consideration is whether sufficient material exists,either from the proffered expert or from competing experts, to allowthe jury to understand the relevant controversies and frailties thatmay surround the scientific evidence. However, Justice Goudgequalified this comment:
I would add only that the presence of competing expertsdoes not obviate the need for the trial judge to determinethat all the expert evidence has sufficient threshold reliabilityto justify its admission.

27.

The concerns and principles arising from the Goudge Report haveequal application to civil actions.

A Look at What Schatzker Says Himself

[57]

The issue of the modified surgical technique first arises in the last

paragraph of Schatzker’s January 26, 2016 report (see the quotation above in theseReasons).

[58]

There, no references are made as to whether the said technique is in

any way recognized in the larger medical community.

[59]

In his later report dated April 6, 2016, Schatzker stated that his opinion

(which presumably includes the notion of the modified surgical tec hnique) is basedon what he has taught and practiced and what his colleagues teach and practice

impressive antecedents” as “virtually infallible and as having moreweight than it deserves”.

- 12 -

(page 2). No further particulars are provided as to whether, and to what extent, the

[60]

In his December 16, 2016 report, in terms of the notoriety of the

modified surgical technique, Schatzker stated only that it has always been hispractice to adjust the surgical procedure to the anticipated difficulties to beencountered.

In other words, one must not act like a “robot” when performing

surgery (pages 1 and 2).

[61]

I pause here to note that Davey, Waddell and Cameron are not the only

highly qualified experts in this case. Schatzker is no slouch. He is an orthopaedicsurgeon at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre.

He is a surgery professor at

University of Toronto. He is an author in the medical field.
The Legal Principles Applied to the Facts in this Case

[62]

Quite appropriately, counsel for Manwell take no issue with the

following: (i) that Schatzker’s evidence is logically relevant, (ii) that it is necessary,
(iii) that it is not the subject of any exclusionary rule, and (iv) that Schatzker is aproperly qualified expert.

[63]

Manwell’s submissions focus on two things: legal relevance (the cost-

benefit analysis, in other words, probative value versus prejudicial effect), and, mostcrucial, reliability.

[64]

On the cost-benefit analysis, I disagree with counsel for Manwell.

[65]

If the trial proceeds, Schatzker will have to testify and be cross-

examined on the issues of informed consent and causation, even if he is precludedfrom saying anything about the modified surgical technique.

said technique is recognized in the larger medical community.

- 13 -

[66]

At least one of the Defence experts will have to testify at trial,

surgical technique.

[67]

Thus, to permit testimony from Schatzker on the modified surgical

technique would mean (i) some prolongation of his evidence, both in direct andcross-examination, (ii) some lengthening of the evidence of the Defence expert, bothin direct and cross-examination, and (iii) possibly the hearing of the evidence ofWaddell and/or Cameron.

[68]

We are not talking about adding weeks to the length of the trial but

rather a few days, in my view.

[69]

That cost is outweighed by the probative value of Schatzker’s

evidence.

[70]

Assuming for the moment that it passes the threshold reliability

concern, it is unquestionably highly probative. Essentially, according to Schatzker,by behaving like a “robot” and not modifying his traditional total knee jointreplacement surgery technique to account for Beverly’s specific circumstances,including her obesity, Manwell increased the prospect of disaster, which is preciselywhat occurred.

[71]

The issue of reliability is a more difficult call in this case.

[72]

I must remember that the presence of competing experts, Davey,

Waddell and/or Cameron, does not obviate the need for me, as the gatekeeper, toensure that expert evidence has sufficient threshold reliability to justify its admission.

[73]

As Madam Justice D. Wilson pointed out at paragraph 14 of Her

Honour’s decision in Khelifa v. Sunrise Property, 2014 ONSC 3218, I must not

regardless of whether Schatzker is prevented from commenting on the modified

- 14 -

simply take the easy way out and pronounce that reliability concerns go simply to

[74]

Justice Goudge pointed to some tools that may help determine the

admissibility of novel scientific evidence. Counsel for Manwell are correct that manyof them work against the admission of Schatzker’s evidence regarding the modifiedsurgical technique.

[75]

First, there is nothing before me that there exists an acceptable body of

evidence or acceptance of the theory to objectively validate the opinion.

[76]

Second, there is nothing before me that there exists peer review of the

said technique.

[77]

Third, there is nothing before me that there exists published literature

on the said technique.

[78]

On the other hand, there is some evidence, albeit through Schatzker

himself, that there is an unknown degree of acceptance or recognition of the saidtechnique in the medical community – his April 6, 2016 report, referred to above inthese Reasons.

[79]

Further, there is ample evidence, especially if all three of the Defence

proposed experts are permitted to testify at trial, as to the alleged frailties andshortcomings associated with Schatzker’s opinion.

[80]

Finally, apart from the tools identified by Justice Goudge, which were

not meant to be exhaustive, there are three other factors that, in my view, supportadmission of Schatzker’s evidence regarding the modified surgical technique.

[81]

First, it is comprehensible. It is not so novel or vague that is defies

rebuttal, as evidenced from the opinions authored by Davey, Waddell and Cameron,

weight and instruct the jury accordingly.

- 15 -

especially Waddell who was able to provide reasons as to why the said technique is,

[82]

Second, in a similar vein, it is not overly complex. Simplicity does not

equal reliability, however, the fact that counsel for Manwell, during submissions onthe Motions, was able to hand up to the Court a one-page colour sketch of thetechnique in question provides some comfort that the jury will at least be able toidentify what it is precisely that the experts are in disagreement about.

[83]

Third and finally, it must be remembered that Schatzker’s evidence

regarding the modified surgical procedure is not to be assessed in a vacuum. It iswhat Schatzker opines ought to have been done in this case, failing which thesurgery was performed in a manner that fell below the standard of care expected, asopposed to being a slave to the same methodology over and over again.

[84]

In other words, one must have due regard for the unique circumstances

of the patient at hand.

[85]

Although counsel for Manwell is correct that none of Davey, Waddell

and Cameron is aware of this modified surgical technique, they are well aware ofand accept the broader concept of the need to take into account the individualcircumstances that present themselves to the operating surgeon.

[86]

For example, in his April 5, 2016 report, Waddell recognizes the

technical problems posed by Beverly in terms of her obesity and the degree ofdeformity of her left knee (page 5).

[87]

While Waddell, Davey and Cameron all agree that Manwell carried out

the surgical procedure competently and with due diligence in the face of thosetechnical issues, Schatzker says otherwise – Manwell ought to have employed themodified surgical technique.

in his view, dangerous.

[88]

I am not prepared to take that assessment away from the jury.

[89]

Although a close-call, I conclude that the Moles have demonstrated on

balance a sufficient threshold of reliability to justify the admission of Schatzker’sevidence on the modified surgical technique.

[90]

What is the result of that decision? Specifically, should Manwell be

limited to calling one expert witness at trial?

[91]

The answer is no. I agree with Manwell.

[92]

First, leave is not required in this case as Manwell does not intend to

call more than three expert witnesses at trial.

[93]

Second, during the course of oral submissions at Court on May 29 th,

Mr. Tamming abandoned the argument about late service of the reports authored byWaddell and Cameron.

[94]

Third, any potential prejudice to be occasioned to the Moles caused by

an imbalance between the number of expert witnesses on their side and that on theother can be alleviated in part by an instruction to the jury that the questions shouldnot be answered simply by counting up the number of witnesses on each side of theaisle; the evidence of a fewer number of witnesses may be preferred over theevidence of a larger number. That is up to the jury.

[95]

Fourth, to address the Moles’ redundancy argument, common sense

and basic fairness suggest that where, as here, the expert evidence offered by oneside is the subject of, at a minimum, questionable reliability and limited notoriety, theother side is entitled to demonstrate at trial that it is not simply a matter of one expertsaying “X” and one expert saying that “X” is not legitimate.

- 16 -

- 17 -

It unduly restricts Manwell’s right to properly and fully defend the claim

[96]

expert to say that Schatzker is out to lunch (my phrase), solely because the Moleshave nobody but Schatzker.

[97]

Fifth and finally, I agree with counsel for Manwell that the decisions

supplied by the Moles are distinguishable in that nearly all of them dealt withsituations where, unlike here, leave was required under section 12 of the (Ontario)
Evidence Act. And none of them dealt with a case involving, as here, rebuttal ofnovel expert evidence.

III.

Conclusion

[98]

For the above reasons, the Motion by the Moles is dismissed.

The

Motion by Manwell is allowed in the alternative.

[99]

Schatzker may testify at trial about the modified surgical technique.

Manwell may call at trial all or some of Davey, Waddell and Cameron.

___________________________
Conlan J.
Released:

May 30, 2017

to say that, on these particular facts, he cannot call any greater number than one

CITATION: Mole and Mole v. Manwell, 2017 ONSC 3357
COURT FILE NO.: CV14-065
DATE: 20170530

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETW EEN:
Beverly Mole and Darryl MolePlaintiffs
- and Dr. Stuart ManwellDefendant

REASONS FOR DECISION

Conlan J.

Released:

May 30, 2017

ONTARIO

