CITATION: Mounce v. Rae, 2017 ONSC 2288
COURT FILE NO.: CV-14-129457
DATE: 20170530

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

MACKENZIE MOUNCE, a minor under
the age of 18 years by her Litigation
Guardian, REBECCA CROSS, REBECCA
CROSS and RYAN MOUNCE
Applicants )
– and –
MARILYN DARLENE RAE and
DOUGLAS MURRAY RAE
Respondents

S. Ibrahim, for the Applicants

HEARD: April 11, 2017

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
MCKELVEY J.:

[1]

Counsel for the applicants have brought an application for the following relief on thisapplication:
1. A judgment appointing Rebecca Cross as Litigation Guardian for the minorapplicant, Mackenzie Mounce.
2. A judgment approving the settlement of the claims for damages arising from adog bite incident which occurred on September 11, 2015.
3. An order that service of the Notice of Application upon the Children’s Lawyer bedispensed with.

[2]

The minor applicant, Mackenzie Mounce, was born on June 30, 2013 and at the time ofthe application was three years old. On January 11, 2017, the claimant’s counsel enteredinto a settlement of the claim, subject to the approval of this Court. Under the terms of

ONTARIO

the settlement the respondents are obliged to pay the sum of $130,000 inclusive of prejudgment interest, disbursements, costs, and HST and the subrogated OHIP claim as wellas the claims for the Family Law Act claimants. The plaintiffs’ solicitor advises that afterpayment of the other claims the amount available for the minor plaintiffs’ claim is
$115,485.68 which includes an allocation of the costs recovered which are estimated at
$16,667.50.

[3]

I initially reviewed the application which was filed as a basket motion on January 25,2017. I endorsed on the record that while I had no difficulty with the quantum of thesettlement I did require further details with respect to the legal costs claimed and how thiswas calculated.

[4]

With respect to legal costs, the applicants’ counsel relies on a contingency fee agreementwhich provides for a contingency fee of 33% and claims the sum of $40,578.30 for fees.

[5]

On March 23, 2017, counsel on behalf of the applicants’ solicitor attended before me toaddress the issue of legal fees claimed. The matter was adjourned so that the applicants’
counsel could provide further details with respect to the calculation of the fees proposedto be charged to the applicants. On April 11, 2017, I heard further argument from theapplicants’ counsel with respect to the issue of the legal fees to be charged.

[6]

The applicants’ counsel, Tina Radimisis has delivered 3 affidavits in support of herapplication. The first dated January 7, 2017 was filed with the application.
Supplementary affidavits dated February 6, 2017 and April 10, 2017 were filed prior toeach of the subsequent attendances before me.

The Contingency Fee Agreement

[7]

The Contingency Fee Agreement with the law firm of Jewell Radimisis Jorge LLP isdated October 7, 2015. It is signed on behalf of Mackenzie Mounce by her LitigationGuardian, Ryan Mounce as well as by Ryan Mounce in his personal capacity andRebecca Cross. Ryan Mounce and Rebecca Cross are the father and mother of MackenzieMounce. The relevant provisions of the Contingency Fee Agreement are found inparagraph 4, as follows:
4.
The contingency fee is payable on the settlement or judgment infavour of the Client for damages, Family Law Act, and/or lump sum buyout of Statutory Accident Benefits, prejudgment interests and costs.
TORT
It is agreed that the LAWYERS’ compensation shall be (33%
plus applicable taxes) of the amount of the recovery of the CLIENT’S
claim for General Damages (pain and suffering), Special Damages
(economic loss), Family Law Act and Prejudgment Interest, whether bysettlement or judgment, inclusive of legal costs and applicable taxes andexclusive of disbursements and any applicable taxes on the

disbursements. Please note that any monies paid by way of settlement orjudgment for costs and/or disbursements (to be paid by the defendants’
insurance company) are not included in the amount on which thecontingency fee is based and are to be paid to the JRJ, and the costsaward which would have gone to the client should effectively reduce theclient’s total cost in fees of brining this action to approximately 20% ofthe total award.
Applicable Principles of Law

[8]

As noted by Justice Del Frate in St. Jean v. Armstrong, 2015 ONSC 13 (affirmed onappeal, 2017 ONCA 145), contingency fee agreements were permitted in Ontario to grantaccess to justice to litigants who ordinarily would not be in a position to pay for legalfees. However, a contingency fee agreement is not a carte blanche to permit lawyers tocharge what the agreement states. Fairness and reasonableness must still be considered.

[9]

In Henricks-Hunter v. 814888 Ontario Inc., [2012] O.J. No. 3207, the Ontario Court ofAppeal clarified how fairness and reasonableness must be considered. The issue offairness of the agreement is to be assessed as of the date the agreement was entered into.
The reasonableness of the agreement is to be assessed as of the date of the hearing. A
contingency fee agreement can only be declared void or cancelled when the courtdetermines that it is either unfair or unreasonable.

[10]

When a solicitor seeks to enter into an enforcement contingency fee agreement with aparty under a disability, the solicitor must comply with the regulations passed pursuant tothe Solicitors Act. Section 5(1) of Ontario Regulation 195/04 provides that:
5. (1) A solicitor for a person under disability represented by a litigationguardian with whom the solicitor is entering into a contingency feeagreement shall,
(a) apply to a judge for approval of the agreement before the agreement isfinalized; or
(b) include the agreement as part of the motion or application forapproval of a settlement or a consent judgment under rule 7.08 of theRules of Civil Procedure.

[11]

In the present case, counsel for the applicants did not obtain approval of the agreementbefore it was finalized. Thus, as part of the approval process for the settlement I amrequired to consider both the fairness and reasonableness of the Contingency FeeAgreement.

The Fairness of the Contingency Fee Agreement

[12]

In the Supplementary Supplementary Affidavit of Tina Radimisis dated April 10, 2017,she states that she initially met with the applicants to discuss the case and theContingency Fee Agreement. She further states that she discussed the agreement withboth the applicants, Rebecca Cross and Ryan Mounce in detail and advised that her firmwould, “charge 33% of the settlement award exclusive of taxes on the legal fees anddisbursements and applicable taxes on disbursements”. She further notes that neitherparents have claimed that the agreement was unfair or that the proposed fees areunreasonable.

[13]

In reviewing the provisions of the Contingency Fee Agreement, there appear to beinconsistent statements as to how the contingency fee will be calculated. In the first halfof the paragraph setting out the calculation of the fee it states that the lawyer’scompensation will be 33% of all sums recovered inclusive of legal costs but excludingdisbursements. In the second half of the paragraph, however the agreement states that anymonies paid by way of settlement for costs and disbursements are not “included in theamount in which the contingency fee is based and are to be paid to JRJ”. The descriptiongiven by Ms. Radimisis does not appear to be consistent with either of the optionsdescribed above. In questioning counsel about whether legal costs were included forpurposes of the fee, he agreed that it looked like there was some discrepancy in thewording of paragraph 4 of the Contingency Fee Agreement. He suggested, however, thatthe second portion of the paragraph related to how the fees would be distributed. In myview, however the basis of how the contingency fee is to be calculated is simply notclear. I consider this discrepancy to be very significant in considering the fairnessrequirement of section 24 of the Solicitors Act. As noted in the Ontario Court of Appealdecision in Raphael Partners v. Lam, [2002] O.J. No. 3605, the Court of Appeal hascommented that the fairness requirement is concerned with the circumstancessurrounding the making of the agreement and whether the client fully understands andappreciates the nature of the agreement that he or she executed (see para. 37).

[14]

It is also significant in my view that the fee agreement states that taking into account thecosts award should, “effectively reduce the client’s total cost in fees in bringing thisaction to approximately 20% of the total award”. This further confuses the question ofhow much will be owed by the clients.

[15]

The lack of precision as to how to properly calculate the contingency fee payable for thissettlement is highlighted by the fact that the applicants’ counsel was not able to providean accurate calculation as to how the fee for the minor applicant in this case wascalculated. As noted previously, the Affidavit of Ms. Radimisis stated that the total offees to be paid to her firm is $40,578.30. When asked how this figure was calculated,counsel advised that they started by charging 20% of the value of the claim (excludingcosts) which by their calculation totalled $19,666.47 (by my calculation the correctamount would in fact be slightly higher at $19,763.60). To this figure the sum of
$2,556.64 is added on account of HST, bringing the total to $22,223.11. To this amount,the sum of $16,667.50 is added as the legal costs recovered in the action, for a grand totalof $38,890.61. This was supposed to represent the amount the minor applicant was to be

[16]

It is significant to note that under section 5 of the Solicitors Act Regulations, theagreement must set out the method by which the fee is to be determined and section 6
requires that a simple example must be provided which shows how the contingency fee iscalculated. The Contingency Fee Agreement in this case does not contain any examplethat shows how the contingency fee is to be calculated. And given the apparentinconsistencies in the paragraph describing the fee to be charged and the inability of theplaintiffs’ solicitor to explain how the fee was calculated, the failure to comply with thisprovision is a significant violation of the Regulations. Based on the above analysis, I havea serious concern about the fairness of the fee agreement and whether the client would bein a position to fully understand the nature of the fee which was to be charged.

[17]

There are other concerns with respect to the fairness of the agreement. Section 28.1(8) ofthe Solicitors Act provides as follows:
(8) A contingency fee agreement shall not include in the fee payable tothe solicitor, in addition to the fee payable under the agreement, anyamount arising as a result of an award of costs or costs obtained as part ofa settlement, unless,
(a) the solicitor and client jointly apply to a judge of the Superior Courtof Justice for approval to include the costs or a proportion of the costs inthe contingency fee agreement because of exceptional circumstances; and
(b) the judge is satisfied that exceptional circumstances apply andapproves the inclusion of the costs or a proportion of them.

[18]

Under section 28.1(9), a contingency fee that is subject to approval under subsection 8 isnot enforceable unless it is so approved. I conclude that there are no exceptionalcircumstances which apply in this case.

[19]

The Divisional Court considered the provisions of section 28.1(8) in Hodge v. Neinstein,2015 ONSC 7345. That decision is currently under appeal but at present time has notbeen ruled on by the Ontario Court of Appeal. In that decision, the Divisional Court notesthat section 28.1(8) prohibits a lawyer from entering into an agreement under which hegets a fee and also any portion of costs recovered in an award or settlement (para. 23). Atparagraph 39, the Court notes that if a contingency fee agreement is subject to approvaland approval is not obtained, the agreement is not enforceable.

[20]

Taken all of the circumstances into account, I have concluded that the Contingency FeeAgreement in this case did not meet the level of fairness required at the time theagreement was entered into. The agreement lacks clarity as to how the fee will becalculated and does not comply with the requirements of the regulations under theSolicitor’s Act.

charged. However, counsel was unable to explain the discrepancy between this amountand the sum of $40,578.30 which is the fee quoted in the affidavit of Ms. Radimisis.

[21]

In the Raphael Partners decision, the Court of Appeal sets out the factors to beconsidered on the reasonableness of fees charged by a solicitor. They include the timeexpended by the solicitor, the legal complexity of the matter at issue, the results achievedand the risk assumed by the solicitor. In the present case, the applicants’ counselacknowledged that there was no significant risk on liability in this case. It was astraightforward dog bite case and there was no significant issue of contributorynegligence by the minor applicant. Thus, the risk of losing the action was close to zero, inlight of the provision of s. 2 of the Dog Owners’ Liability Act, RSO 1990, c. 16.

[22]

Similarly, the legal complexity of a matter cannot be considered to be particularlyonerous. This is reflected in the fact that the claim settled very promptly. The docketswhich were produced at my request indicate that the applicants’ counsel had an initialinterview with her clients on October 7, 2015. On November 29, 2016, the applicants’
counsel spent two hours preparing for a settlement meeting with a tort adjuster. ByDecember 5, 2016, the applicants’ counsel had concluded a settlement and called theclients to report the settlement to her clients. Between October 7, 2015 and December 5,2016, the applicants’ counsel spent a total of 6.5 hours on the file. There was, of course,additional time spent by other staff members who were working on the file together withMs. Radimisis. As of February 6, 2017, the total hours spent by all time keepers was 63.1
hours. Based on the hourly rates charged, the total value of the dockets was $15,047.50.
This includes a total of approximately 24 hours which was docketed by secretarialassistants who were charged out at $175 per hour which I consider excessive. I acceptthat the time spent by counsel on a file does not dictate whether the amount charged bythe applicants’ solicitor is a reasonable amount. It is, however, a relevant factor which I
have taken into account.

[23]

I do accept that the result obtained in this case was excellent and represented a very goodsettlement for the minor applicant. However, taking all of the factors into account asoutlined above, I have concluded that the fee proposed by the applicants’ counsel basedon the Contingency Fee Agreement is not reasonable.

[24]

As I have concluded that the requirements for fairness and reasonableness have not beenmet, I have concluded that the Contingency Fee Agreement is not enforceable. This ofcourse leaves the question as to what amount should be paid to the applicants’ counsel fortheir services in representing the minor applicant on this claim. Taking the factors whichI have referred to above into consideration, I have concluded that a fee based on 20% ofthe total recovery for the minor applicant would provide an appropriate basis tocompensate the applicants’ counsel. Based on a total recovery for the minor applicant of
$115,485.68, I find that the sum of $23,097.13 is appropriate to compensate theapplicants’ counsel for legal services provided to the minor plaintiff. That figure includesa significant premium based on the time spent for the result achieved and the fact that theapplicants’ solicitor took the case on a contingency basis. In this regard, I have taken intoaccount that additional time has been spent by the applicants’ counsel in obtaining courtapproval. It also reflects the fact that there was virtually no risk on liability and the

Reasonableness

settlement was achieved quickly and without the necessity of commencing an action. Inaddition to this amount the applicants’ counsel is entitled to payment for alldisbursements, plus HST on both the counsel fee and disbursements. I therefore grantjudgment approving the settlement of the claim for damages of the minor applicant andappoint Rebecca Cross as Litigation Guardian for the minor applicant with fees to be paidto the applicants’ counsel in accordance with this decision.

Justice M. McKelveyReleased: May 30, 2017

CITATION: Mounce v. Rae, 2017 ONSC 2288

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
MACKENZIE MOUNCE, a minor under the age of 18
years by her Litigation Guardian, REBECCA CROSS,REBECCA CROSS and RYAN MOUNCE
Applicants
– and –
MARILYN DARLENE RAE and DOUGLAS
MURRAY RAE
RespondentsREASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Justice M. McKelvey

Released: May 30, 2017

ONTARIO

