CITATION: Nderitu v Kamoji, 2017 ONSC 2617
COURT FILE NO.: FC-15-258
DATE: 2017/05/29

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
Alex Wachira Nderitu

– and –
Wathira Kamoji

Applicant )
Respondent )

Richard R. Marks, counsel for the Applicant

J. Alison Campbell, counsel for theRespondentHEARD: January, 16, 17, 18, 19 , 20, 23,24, 25, 26 and March 20, 2017

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
SHELSTON, J.

[1]

The applicant (“father“) and the respondent (“mother“) started to live together on January

1, 2012, married on April 14, 2012 and separated on November 7, 2014 when the father left thematrimonial home. They have one child, namely Aden Kayo Wachira (“Aden”) born March 11,2013.

[2]

This trial dealt with the following issues:
(a)

should there be an order for joint custody, parallel parenting or sole custody on allmajor decisions?

(b)

what parenting schedule is in the child’s best interests?

(c)

should table child support be ordered retroactive to November 2014 and in whatamount?

ONTARIO

(d)

should the parties be ordered to maintain the child as a beneficiary of theirextended health plans?
should one or both parties be ordered to designate the other as the irrevocablebeneficiary in trust for the child of a life insurance policy and if so in whatamount?

(f)

who should pay costs and in what amount?

Background

[3]

The father is 39 years of age and works for Nokia as a Lead Project Manager with an

annual income of approximate $72,000 per year. In the last five years, he has worked from homeand is usually working between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. depending on the day. There are timeswhen he is required to attend his office but most of his day is spent in conference calls, emailsand working from his computer at home.

[4]

The mother is 39 years of age and is employed with Employment and Social

Development Canada with an annual income of approximately $72,000 per year.

[5]

Both parties have multiple university degrees. The parties met in the fall of 2010 and by

November 2011 were engaged. In January 2012, the parties moved in together at a home ownedby the mother’s parents, who were posted overseas at the time. At that time, the father rented outhis condominium.

[6]

Upon moving in with the mother, the father started working from home. The father

pursued post university education when he enrolled in an MBA program to improve his skillsand he attended two classes a week in the evenings. He graduated with an MBA in December2013.

[7]

The parties married on April 14, 2012.

[8]

The mother became pregnant in the summer of 2012. When the mother was a teenager,

she was advised that it would be difficult for her to carry any child to full term. Consequently,

(e)

once pregnant, she decided to use the services of a midwife, an acupuncturist and a kinesiologistto ensure that her child was carried to term. The father attended two or three midwife meetings

cleaner to help the mother at home.

[9]

Aden was born on March 11, 2013. The father was present at the birth and both parties

were very excited by the arrival of their new son.

[10]

In the initial months after the child’s birth, the father would get up in the night to bring

the child to the mother to breastfeed. In the morning, the father would take care of the child butonce he started to work, the mother was responsible for his care. The father was responsible forhelping the mother but he continued to work from home during regular business hours, studiedfor his MBA and on Sundays tutored a high school student in mathematics.

[11]

The mother was very concerned about socializing the child and arranged play dates with

friends. The mother describes the child as social, loving, warm compassionate and enjoyingpeople. The child was weaned off breastfeeding at least partially at approximately 15 months ofage. The child was supplemented by regular milk and by the summer of 2014, was drinkingregular milk as well as at the daycare.

[12]

In 2014, the mother planned to return to work. The mother investigated possible daycare

providers. Both parents interviewed the final person and hired her.

[13]

In March, 2014, the mother returned to work. Her hours of work were from 7:00 a.m. to

3:00 p.m. She would leave for work by 6:00 a.m. to take the city bus and would be homebetween 4:30 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. Once the mother left for work, the child was the father’sresponsibility. The child would normally awake around 6:30 a.m. and the father would feed,change and deliver him to daycare near the home by 8:15 a.m. The father would then returnhome, conduct his normal business affairs and study for his MBA. Either the father or bothparents together would pick up the child at the end of the day.

and the ultrasound appointment. The father helped prepare a new room for the baby and hired a

[14]

If the child fell ill, it was the father who was responsible for the child because he was

working from home only a few minutes away from the daycare while the mother was at her

[15]

By September 2014, the parties started drifting apart. On September 12, 2014, the mother

decided to separate from the father. In October, 2014, the father told the mother that he hadpurchased a four bedroom townhouse approximately a three minute drive from the mother’sresidence and a two minute drive from the child’s daycare

[16]

On Thursday, November 6, 2014, the mother’s lawyer had sent a draft separation

agreement. The father had not retained a lawyer. The parties undertook to sign the final versionas soon as it was ready and that they had agreed to all its terms. On November 7, 2014, the fathermet with the mother and her father who was visiting. The parties signed a document entitled
“Commitment to Sign Parental Agreement”. The parties agreed to sign this document in order tofacilitate the father’s move to his new residence on Friday, November 7, 2014, but an agreementwas never signed.
Period of November 2014 to February 5, 2015

[17]

At the beginning, the mother wanted Aden in her primary care as she was breastfeeding.

The parties agreed to a parenting schedule that provided that during the week, the father wouldattend at the mother’s home at approximately 6 a.m. to care for the child on Tuesday,Wednesday and Thursday. The mother would leave for work at approximately 6 a.m., the fatherwould come to her home and he was responsible to wake the child at 6:30 a.m. and care for thechild until delivering the child to daycare at approximately 8:15 a.m. The mother would returnhome between 4:30 and 5:00 p.m.

[18]

On Tuesdays, the father would have access from 5:45 p.m. to 7:45 p.m.; on Thursdays,

the father would have the child from 5:45 p.m. until daycare at 8:30 a.m. and on Fridays and onSundays, from 8:30 a.m. until daycare at 8:30 a.m. on Monday.

employment in Gatineau, Québec.

[19]

This schedule resulted in the child sleeping at the mother’s home five nights per week

being Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday. The child slept at the father’s home

[20]

Problems arose with this agreement when the father mentioned to the mother that on

Tuesdays the child was not adjusting well as he would throw a fit and did not want to go back tothe mother’s home and that it was too short a time as he had to rush when he would have to pickthe child up at the mother’s home at 5:45 p.m., return to his home, feed the child, play with thechild, and return the child by 7:45 p.m. The mother refused to change the agreement.

[21]

A disagreement arose regarding Saturday access by the father. The child had been

registered for swimming lessons for November and December 2014 but the child was sick sooften that the mother withdrew the child from the course. Consequently, the father would see hischild at the mother’s house for a few hours on Saturday to visit with the child. In December2014, the mother advised the father that he would no longer have access to the child onSaturdays. Her rationale was that the swimming lessons, which were on Saturdays, ended inDecember and consequently there was no need for the father to have access to his child for thatperiod of time.

[22]

The father was very upset. He sent the mother a text message and attended and banged on

the mother’s door to speak to her. After receiving the message, the mother was concerned andwent to a friend’s house until 11 p.m. She was not home when the father banged on her door. Shehad her cousin come over to her home to be present when the father picked up the child onSunday morning. There was no incident on that Sunday morning.

[23]

The mother went to the police to get assistance without success and put an extra deadbolt

and changed the alarm code at the home. Despite this concern, the father continued to attend atthe mother’s home on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday morning to care for the child while themother went to work.

[24]

The father was not happy with his access to his son. The mother refused to vary the

agreement and consequently, the father commenced these proceedings on February 5, 2015.

on two nights per week being Thursday and Sunday nights.

March 11, 2015-August 25, 2015 Parenting Schedule

[25]

By March 2015, the mother was concerned that the father was not civil with her, would

Consequently on March 10, 2015, the mother unilaterally decided that the father was no longerpermitted to attend at her home on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday morning to care for thechild. The mother decided to deliver the child to the father’s home at 6:15 a.m. before leaving forwork at which point the father would be responsible for the child’s care until delivering him todaycare at approximately 8:15 a.m.

[26]

Other than delivering the child to the father’s home on Tuesday, Wednesday and

Thursday morning, the residential arrangements for the child remained the same. The childcontinued to sleep five of seven nights at his mother’s home.

[27]

In the spring of 2015, the father started to do activities with Ms. Chantha Nems, a co-

employee at Nokia and her daughter. By July 2015, the father wanted to go to Niagara Falls for aweek with the child. The mother indicated he could only go for five days but the father insistedon taking the child for seven days. Further, while in Niagara Falls, the mother insisted on beingable to speak to the child every day which the father agreed to. The father did not tell the motherthat Ms. Nems and her child were going to accompany him and Aden to Niagara Falls to avoidan argument. The parties’ relationship was tense.
August 25, 2015-October 2016 Parenting Schedule

[28]

Problems arose as the father was concerned that on Tuesdays access, at times the mother

was late which affected his time with his child. Consequently, effective August 25, 2015, thefather unilaterally decided to keep Aden overnight on Tuesday’s returning him to daycare onWednesday morning. The father advised the mother by email of the change. She was very upsetand refused to change. She called the police to seek assistance and was advised that it was a civilmatter and they would not become involved. The mother was not in favour of any changes in theschedule and felt that was too much back and forth for the child. This change resulted in thechild’s sleeping on Tuesday, Thursday and Sunday nights at his father’s home.

ignore her, she did not feel safe near him and she wanted to eliminate any tension for Aden.

[29]

The mother felt that her bonding time with Aden was compromised by the father’s

actions. Despite not agreeing with the change in the schedule, the mother indicated that her

indicated that in her home the child did yoga, meditation, read, played and the atmosphere in herhome was very calm and quiet. She indicated there are no televisions or computers for the childto use and since birth, she has read to him and sang to him.

[30]

By September 2015, the father planned to take a five day “staycation” with his son at

home. He emailed the mother as to his intentions but she did not reply. On the first day of theintended staycation, the mother attended at the daycare to remove the child before the fatherarrived. The mother exited the daycare holding the child’s hand when the father arrived. Thechild ran to the father and consequently they left together. The father was concerned that themother would take the child from the daycare so he kept the child in his care for the entire week.

[31]

The father had another vacation week with his child in the fall of 2015 where he stayed in

Ottawa with the child.

[32]

The parties were able to agree on the sharing of the Christmas vacation in 2015 and in

March 2016, the mother went to Boston for one week with the child and the father consented.

[33]

On April 27, 2016, the mother insisted that she have makeup access for Mother’s Day on

May 15, 2016 as the child would be in the father’s care. The father agreed. The mother was to bein Toronto visiting family on Father’s Day in June 2016. The father proposed that he have thechild on June 25, 2016 for makeup access. The mother disagreed and indicated the father couldhave the child from 2:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. on Father’s Day. The father reluctantly accepted whatthe mother was prepared to agree to.

[34]

In May 2016, the father wanted to take the child to Germany and needed the child’s

passport be renewed and required a travel consent letter. On February 23, 2016 counsel for themother advised that the mother was consenting to the travel proposed by the father subject tocertain conditions including the mother’s right to speak to the child every other day by Skypeand that the mother would be permitted to travel for one week to Boston and Guyana. The father

preparatory work with her child had “saved him” when this new schedule started. The mother

agreed to the Skype and the mother could travel to Boston but not Guyana in the summer assummer travel was to be resolved through mediation.
The father responded but added a condition that the father and the child could travel to

Kenya to visit family. By letter dated March 7, 2016, the mother consented but rejected therequest of the father to go to Kenya. On April 4, 2016, counsel for the mother sent a further lettercorrecting the travel dates and other information. A further problem arose with respect to a travelconsent form and passport. Despite starting in February 2016, the required documents were notsigned and given to the father.

[36]

On April 26, 2016, counsel for the father advised that unless a travel consent and passport

were received that day, he would bring an emergency motion. The documents were not receivedand consequently on April 28, 2016, the father brought an emergency motion before MasterChampagne who ordered:
(a)

on consent, the child’s habitual and ordinary residence is Ottawa, Ontario;

(b)

the father shall be permitted to travel to Germany with the child for May 4, 2016
to May 11, 2016 and shall return the child to Ottawa on May 11th 2016 with orwithout the consent of the mother;

(c)

the mother should immediately provide the father with the child’s passport and aconsent authorizing the father to travel with the child between May 4, 2016 andMay 11, 2016 to Germany; and,

(d)

[37]

the mother to pay the father’s costs for the motion in the amount of $750.

The father, Aden, Ms. Nems and her daughter travelled to Germany. The father did not

tell the mother he was travelling with Ms. Nems and her child to avoid an argument. When thefather went to Germany in 2016, one of the conditions that he would arrange for Skype accesswith the mother. The father, despite being six hours ahead, tried to rearrange access by Skype.
There were significant problems in arranging the Skype access as the mother did not have Skypeaccess at work and to accommodate the time change. The mother was unable to speak to Aden

[35]

and had to wait till Saturday at 1:00 a.m. Ottawa time to speak to the child. A review of the emailexchange between the parties indicates that the mother was adamant that she speak to the child

difference between Ottawa and Germany and the fact that the mother did not have Skype accessat work. As the mother did not have Skype at work, the only Skype access that could occurwould be at home. As she left for work at 6:00 a.m. and returned by approximately 4:30 p.m. andbased on the time change, through no fault of the father and despite his best efforts, the Skypeaccess did not take place. The emails exchanged by the mother on May 6, 2016 indicates that sheexpected the Skype access to occur, that she believed the father was denying her access, thefather was preventing the child to speak to her mother and that he was attempting to alienate herfrom the child’s life. The mother had all the telephone numbers of the places where the fatherwere staying in Germany but she never called because it was not an emergency. The father wentso far as to take a video of the child and email it to the mother who received it and saw the child.

[38]

At the end of September 2016, the mother indicates the child was reluctant to go to the

father’s home. The mother indicated that her son was suffering from a degree of separationanxiety that had occurred prior to the end of September 2016 but that she could handle the issue.
By the end of September 2016, the mother indicated that the child really did not want to go seehis father and she texted the father accordingly. Despite the child apparently suffering fromseparation anxiety, the mother has taken no steps to seek medical advice on how to deal with theissue.

[39]

On October 20, 2016, both parties attended an appointment with the family doctor as the

child was sick. The doctor wanted a blood test and the parties discussed where to take the childto have the blood test. The parties argued. The mother indicated that it should be at a clinicdesignated by her and that she was going back to work and wanted the child to go with her. Atthis time, the child was in the mother’s arms. The father asked to give the child a hug and thenpromptly took the child and left the doctor’s office to go to his car. The mother ran after thefather who put the child in the car seat of his car. The parties continued to argue and swear ateach other. The mother was incensed and eventually opened the back door of the car andremoved the child from the car seat and took the child to her car. The mother then took the child

every second day but it is clear that the parties did not think through the difficulties in the time

to daycare. The mother called the police but no further action was taken. The mother contactedthe Children’s Aid Society who interviewed the father. The child protection worker sent a letter

of emotional harm resulting from exposure to domestic violence. The investigation regardingrisk of physical harm was deemed inconclusive. The Society closed their file as the matter wasproceeding through the family court.

October 2016 Forward Parenting Schedule

[40]

Based on the recommendations made by the Children’s Aid Society worker, the mother

advised the father by email that she had unilaterally decided to drop the child off to directly todaycare on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday morning rather than dropping the child off at thefather’s home. The mother’s rationale was that this schedule avoided interactions between theparties.

[41]

In response to the mother’s unilateral action, the father unilaterally decided to implement

an alternating weekend schedule. The new schedule was follows:
Week OneThe child would be with the father from Tuesday at 4:30 p.m. untilWednesday morning to daycare; Thursday from 4:30 p.m. to Fridaymorning to daycare and Friday at 4:30 p.m. to Monday morning todaycare.
Week TwoThe child would be with the father from Tuesday at 4:30 p.m. toWednesday morning to daycare at 8:30 a.m. and from Thursday at 4:30
p.m. to Friday morning to daycare at 8:30 a.m.

to the father in December 6, 2016 indicating the Society had determined that the child was at risk

[42]

This schedule resulted in the child sleeping at both parents home seven nights in a two-

week period. The mother was concerned that this new weekend schedule caused a gap of

became clingy and was exhibiting signs of separation anxiety. Increasing her stress was the factthat when the child was in the care of the father there was no contact for information with thechild.

[43]

By the fall 2016, the relationship between the father and Ms. Nems became romantic.

The parties started to co-parent Aden and Ms. Nems daughter. The father was reluctant to tell themother because he was concerned it would start a “nuclear war or get into a battle”. The motherbecame aware of the relationship in September 2016 when Ms. Nems accompanied the father toa trial management conference. Following the trial management conference, the mother textedthe father that the child did not want to go to the father’s on Tuesday and Thursday mornings.
Within one week of that conference, when the father went to pick the child up at the mother’shome, the child backed up and was reluctant to go with the father. After 6 to 8 minutes of thefather talking to his son, the child went and has continued to go.
The Party’s Relationship With Aden

[44]

Ms. Jacqueline Wachira, a cousin of the father, stated that her relationship with him is

more like brother and sister. She testified that after the child was born both parents were devotedto the child. She observed the father changing and bathing the child. She testified that therelationship with the father and the child is very good, the child is very happy with his father. Heis a creative and inquisitive child who is very well behaved. She confirms that the mother isdevoted to the child and that she had no concerns about either party’s parenting ability. Sheobserved the father and Ms. Nems and indicated they work well with their children.

[45]

Ms. Nems confirmed that she and her daughter started interacting with the father and his

child in July 2015 when they would go to the park near her house. In October 2015, Ms. Nemsand her daughter moved into the father’s residence on a temporary basis as result of aninfestation of mice in her apartment. She has travelled to Niagara Falls and Germany with the

between 4 to 5 days without the child seeing his mother. The mother’s evidence is that the child

father and her daughter and Aden. She testified that the father is easy-going, intelligent and thatshe has never felt threatened by him and that the children get along quite well together.
The mother’s father, Mr. Kamoji Wachira, a retired senior analyst at CIDA indicated that

his grandson is a happy-go-lucky, bright little boy who is very gifted and has above averageintellect. He describes his daughter as being determined, pleasant, sociable and devoted to herchild. He stated that he found that the father was hard-working, quiet, and devoted to his job andthat the father’s role after the birth of the child was to bathe him, do laundry and rock the baby tosleep. His daughter did all other tasks. He found the father to be very hard-working as he wouldwork at his job during the day and take classes at night. Mr. Wachira was present when the fatherwanted to leave the matrimonial home on November 7, 2014. He found that the father was veryemotional by crying and raising his voice. It was Mr. Wachira who was a witness to thecommitment to sign parental agreement and was influential in negotiating the initial parentingschedule. Mr. Wachira was concerned about the tension in the household. He had returned fromoverseas approximate two weeks before father left the matrimonial home. He was concernedabout his daughter’s security and safety and that was one of the reasons his son came to stay withhis sister around the time of separation. He had the impression that the father was rational butthere were elements of hidden violence by verbal threats that may become physical. He finallyindicated that the stress of the separation was very hard on his daughter as he indicated the childwas taken away from his daughter at such a young age, 18 months.
CUSTODY
The Law

[47]

A court of competent jurisdiction may, on application by either or both spouses or by any

other person, make an order respecting the custody of or the access to, or the custody of andaccess to, any or all children of the marriage. (s. 16(1) Divorce Act).

[48]

The court may make an order under this section granting custody of, or access to, any and

all children of the marriage to any one or more persons. (s. 16(4) Divorce Act).

[46]

[49]

In making an order under this section, the court shall not take into consideration the past

conduct of any person unless the conduct is relevant to the ability of that person to act as a parent

[50]

In making an order under this section, the court shall give effect to the principle that a

child of the marriage should have as much contact with the other spouse as is consistent with thebest interests of the child and, for that purpose, shall take into consideration the willingness ofthe person for whom custody is sought to facilitate such conduct. (s. 16(10) Divorce Act).

[51]

The only relevant issue in custody and access matters is the best interests of the child.

(Gordon v. Goertz 1996 S. C. J.No.52).

[52]

The jurisprudence provides guidelines for the court in considering a joint custodial

regime as follows:
(a)

the parties need not consent to an order for joint custody but before ordering jointcustody the court must have some evidence that the parties are able tocommunicate

effectively

with

each

other;

(Kaplanis

v.

Kaplanis

2005

CarswellOnt 266 OCA);

(b)

simply relying on allegations of conflict will be insufficient to preclude a jointcustody order. The analysis must be what is the nature, extent and frequency ofconflict such of conflict impacts are as likely to impact on the well-being of thechild if the evidence is that the parties have been able to shelter the child from theconflict reasonably well and put the child’s interest ahead of their own, an orderfor joint custody may be appropriate. (Ladisa v. Ladisa 2005 CarswellOnt 268
OCA);

(c)

one parent cannot create problems with the other parent then claim custody on thebasis of a lack of cooperation (Lawson v. Lawson 2006 Carswell on 4789 OCA);

(d)

where it is necessary to preserve the balance of power between the parties,particularly cases were both parties are caring and competent parents but one

of a child. (s. 16(8) Divorce Act).

party has been primarily responsible for the conflict, joint custody versus solecustody may be appropriate. (Khairzad v. Macfarlane, 2015 ONSC 7148 and

(e)

in determining whether a reasonable measure of communication and cooperationis in place and is achievable in the future the court must consider the source of theconflict, consider whether one parent is creating the conflict and engaging inreasonable conduct, impeding access, marginalizing the other parent or by othermeans and then claim sole custody of the basis of lack of cooperationcommunication. (Khairzad v Macfarlane, 2015 ONSC 7148)

[53]

One option is to order parallel parenting. In Cox v. Stephen, [2003] O.J. No. 4371, the

Court of Appeal upheld a parallel parenting order, with terms giving decision-makingresponsibility respecting education to the mother, and decision-making respecting the child’sphysical health to the father, despite the longstanding history of conflict between the parties. TheCourt held that parallel parenting did not require a cooperative working relationship or evengood communication. The objective of parallel parenting was to give the parents equal status,each with distinct rights and responsibilities in relation to specific topics.

[54]

In Ursic v. Ursic, 2006 O.J. No, 2178 , the Court of Appeal upheld the trial judge’s

decision to award joint custody with a parallel parenting order in a high conflict situation andspecifically stated at paragraph 26:
26.Sup. Ct. J.), and Mol v. Mol, [1997] O.J. No. 4060 (Sup. Ct. J.). The trial judgeviewed parallel parenting to be suitable in this case, and I a.m. not persuaded thathe erred in ordering it.

[55]

parenting in the following paragraphs:

Fraser v Fraser 2016 ONSC 4720); and,

79
Parallel parenting arrangements have been resorted to in practice and bytrial courts to resolve situations where both parents have been involved with thechild and wish to retain decision-making rights, but the conflict between them issuch that a joint custody order is not feasible or in the child's best interests. (M.
(T.J.) v. M. (P.G.), 2002 CarswellOnt 356 (Ont. S.C.J.). There are many merits toa parallel parenting regime, in appropriate cases. It gives both the child and theparents the benefit of maintaining each parent as a meaningful player in the child'slife, over and above timesharing with the child. The importance of this factorfrom an emotional standpoint cannot be underestimated where a family is inturmoil because of a breakdown in the parents' relationship. In addition, bydelineating clear areas of decision-making between the parties, parallel parentinghas the potential in appropriate cases to disengage the parties and reduce parentalconflict.

[56]

The Court of Appeal has upheld parallel parenting orders where joint decision-making

was impracticable and unworkable. (Cox v Down 2003 O.J. No. 4371; Andrade v. Kennedy 2006Position on Custody

[57]

The father’s position is :

(a)

that both parties should have an equal say in all major decisions affecting theirchild;

(b)

in the alternative, he proposes a parallel parenting regime where he be responsiblefor all education and medical decisions for the child and the mother responsiblefor religion and dental issues. With respect to activities, the child is to beregistered in two activities per season and the right to decide the activities wouldrotate by season;

(c)

that there should be an equal timesharing schedule based on the current parentingagreement; and,

(d)

the father proposes that every season each parent would have a right to select anactivity, they try to schedule the activities so both parents can attend in any event

of a conflict one parent has the right to decide even if it conflicts. The right todecide what alternates by season.
The mother’s position is:

(a)

that she should have sole custody, to be able to make the final decisions regardingthe child after consulting with the father;

(b)

the mother disagrees with a parallel parenting regime as she is been the mainparent responsible for the child’s education, medical, dental and activitiesdecisions;

(c)

that she is in agreement with the first week of the two week parenting scheduleproposed by the father but in the second week wishes more time than the father toprovide the child with stability while he attends school; and,

(d)

that overall the mother should have the child eight nights and the father six nightson a 14 day rotating schedule.

[59]

Regarding the parties relationship, the mother says that the father is loud, angry and

aggressive and can be intimidating in her interaction with him. Consequently, in her view, shecannot make any decisions with the father and is fearful of the father’s reaction if she disagreeswith his views. The mother testified that there were a series of incidents that caused her to beintimidated by the father including:

(a)

The first incident occurred on the eve of the parties wedding when the mother,father, the mother’s parents and the father’s mother attended to inspect thereception area at the Aviation Museum. At that time they were advised thatanother group would be sharing part of the reception area. The father became veryupset, pointed in the face of the event planner and screamed at her. The father’sreaction is corroborated by the evidence of the mother and her father, Mr.Wachira. The mother broke down in tears and then went home for the rehearsal

[58]

dinner. All parties agree that the father was upset and so was the mother. Theydiffer on the degree;In the months leading up to separation, the mother indicated that the father wouldhave bouts of anger, would not talk to her and that she was constantly walking onegg shells. The father moved to a bed in the basement in October 2014. Themother retained a lawyer and wanted to document any agreement the partiesreached regarding the child and all issues related to separation.

(c)

The mother describes the period of September 12, 2014 to November 7, 2014 asvery tense. There was no communication between the parties except aboutdiscussing a possible parenting schedule. The mother found that the father waswalking around glaring at her and menacing her but the parties followed the sameroutine and lived together.

(d)

In November 2014, around the time that the father was to leave the matrimonialhome, the mother was concerned about the father’s anger and aggressiveness andasked her brother to come down from Toronto to stay with her. In addition, sheenlisted the assistance of her father who met with the parties to negotiate theinitial residential arrangements for the child;

(e)

In December 2015, the mother terminated the father’s access to the child at herhome on Saturday for a few hours. In reply, the father sent the mother a textmessage indicating he was very upset. The father went to the mother’s home andbanged on her door. When she did not answer, as she was not present, he calmeddown and left;

(f)

During the October\November 2015 staycation when the father and motherdisagreed as to whether or not the father could care for Aden for the entire weekwhile he prepared for examinations. The mother disagreed that the child should betaken out of daycare. The father took the child out of the daycare and kept thechild for the week;

(b)

(g)

In September 2016, the father attended at the mother’s home to pick the child upfor access. The child did not want to go. The father picked the child up and put

The mother indicated he did not want to go. The father was very upset and leftwith the child; and,

(h)

The incident at the doctor’s office in October 2016.

ANALYSIS

[60]

In arriving at my decision regarding the decision-making aspect for custody of the child, I

have considered the testimony of the parties, the exhibits filed and the jurisprudence. I have alsoconsidered the parties interaction with respect to issues of the child’s activities, health,interaction between the parties, historical decision-making and the ability of the parties tocommunicate on important matters regarding their child. Since the birth of the child, I find thatthe parties have been able to agree on many issues regarding their child such as:

(a)

to register the child in soccer, swimming and gymnastics since separation;

(b)

that the child should have a flu shot. The father was upset that on the day afteremailing the mother of the requirement of the injection, she obtained a last minuteappointment and had the flu shot administered. The father was upset he was notadvise and not in attendance;

(c)

that the child would attend Forest Valley Elementary School in September 2016;

(d)

that religion is not important in their or the child’s life but it may change in thefuture; and,

(e)

consented to vacations including the mother travelling outside of Canada to visitfamily.

[61]

I find that the mother was the lead person in investigating the various needs for the child

but both parents were involved in all final decisions such as :

him in the car. This was the first time that he did not want to go with his father.

(a)

When the mother was pregnant with the child, she registered him in certain publicschools to allow him to be enrolled in pre-and post-school daycare programs;When the parties agreed that the mother would return to work and needed adaycare, it was the mother who conducted the initial telephone interviews andnarrowed down the list to one individual who met with both parties. The partiesjointly agreed to register the child with the daycare provider;

(c)

The mother made the initial call for the child’s medical doctor. Both partiesattended the appointments. The mother usually goes into the appointments with alist of questions while the father usually takes a secondary role and listens to theinteraction. He will ask questions if he needs clarification;

(d)

The mother contacted an ophthalmologist for Aden at seven months of age. Thefather did not to attend the first appointment but has attended subsequentappointments;

(e)

In the summer of 2016, the family doctor recommended that the parentsinvestigate the child’s right eye. The child was seen and is to be re-evaluated2017;

(f)

In June 2013, the mother originally retained an osteopath to care for Aden. In2015, the mother changed to an osteopath in Orleans, to be closer to her home, thelast visit was approximately one year ago. The mother takes the child to theappointments. The parties agreed to observe the child rather than having him seenby a pediatric chiropractor regarding a rotated pelvis, a condition suffered by themother;

(g)

From August 2013 to July 2014, the child was treated for torticollis at theChildren’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario where he saw a therapist over an 11 monthperiod. The mother took the child to these appointments; and,

(b)

(h)

The current dentist was recommended by the child’s pediatrician. Both partiesattend all appointments.

I find that the parties have had differences regarding medical decisions affecting their

child set out as follows:

(a)

The parties differed on the use of a puffer after the child was diagnosed withasthma but currently they are in agreement;

(b)

The parties differ on the child being given almond milk. The father is concernedthat since the child is allergic to cashews and pistachios he may suffer the effectsof cross pollination. The mother is following the advice of the allergist; and,

(c)

The parties differ on the use of an iron supplement coupled with the use of prunejuice to deal with possible constipation by the child.

FINAL DECISION-MAKING

[63]

The mother’s position is this is a high conflict matter where the parties cannot

communicate and cooperate to make decisions in the best interests of the child. The mother doesnot trust the father because he failed to tell her about his girlfriend and that he took the child andhis girlfriend and her daughter to Niagara Falls and Germany without telling the mother. She alsocomplains that the father is absent-minded and can be angry and irrational. The mother submitsthat she would take a more holistic approach to all decisions such as getting all the backgroundinformation, consulting on all the professionals and then making a decision.

[64]

In her view, the parents do not agree on the application of the asthma puffer and the

mother giving the child almond milk. The mother indicates that after separation sometime in2015, she saw a psychiatrist to deal with the problems that she felt she had with the father. Thepsychiatrist advised the mother to parent as if she is a sole parent with no interaction with thefather consequently when the child is in her care, she makes all decisions and in case ofemergency, she will communicate with the father.

[62]

[65]

The mother wishes to make all decisions regarding the child because she has been the

parent to make those decisions since the child’s birth. She has no ability to communicate with thethe daycare is the father’s cousin and not the child’s mother. The mother admitted that since theincident at the doctor’s office in October 2016, there have been no other incidents.

[66]

The mother admits that today the father attends most of all medical appointments and

refers to the father as her ”bodyguard” at the appointments as normally the father just listens tothe advice been given by the medical practitioner.

[67]

The father’s position is that they can make these decisions together, that they attend

dental, medical and activities together and that he is never interfered with the request by themother for a vacation. He indicates that he has no animosity for the mother and they have beenable to resolve issues such as when the daycare provider broke her ankle and was unavailable forweeks; the parents made arrangements to share the two weeks without argument. The fatherreadily admits that he was emotional after the separation as he felt he was being pushed out ofany serious involvement in his child. He indicates he has moved on and only wishes to act in thebest interests of his child.

[68]

In the alternative, the father seeks an order for parallel parenting in that he would have

sole decision-making regarding education and medical decisions while the mother can makedecisions regarding the child’s religion and dental care.

[69]

I have considered the testimony of the various witnesses and the exhibits filed and I make

the following findings of fact:
(a)

Both the mother and father are highly educated and intelligent parents withmultiple university degrees and stable employment;

(b)

The child is bonded to and loved by his parents;

(c)

Both parents have been involved in all decisions regarding their child be itmedical, dental, selection of the daycare provider and activities;

father but is prepared to consult with him. The mother complains that the emergency contact at

(d)

The parties have had disagreements regarding the child attending the Montessorischool, the issue regarding the use of the child’s puffer, the father’s concerned

(e)

At separation, the father was very emotional and concerned that he was going tobe restricted in his child’s life. I accept the evidence of the mother and her fatherthat they were concerned about the father’s reaction when he physically left thehome. However, the mother agreed that from November 2014 to October 2016
that the father attend at her home at 6 a.m. on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursdaymorning or she would attend at the father’s home on Tuesday, Wednesday orThursday morning to allow the father to care for the child. I do not accept themother’s allegation that she was afraid of the father. If the mother was afraid ofthe father, she would not have gone and interacted with him for over two years,three mornings per week at 6 a.m. without any witnesses;

(f)

Both parents have unilaterally modified the parenting agreement;

(g)

At times both parties have insisted on makeup time, telephone time or Skype timewith the child that has caused disagreements between the parties;

(h)

Both parties have acted improperly with each other. The incident at the doctor’soffice in October 2016, where the parties were fighting over the care of the childto take the child to a blood test was unfortunate and unwarranted. I blame bothparties for what occurred that day. I can only imagine of how the child felt by theactions of his parents that day;

(i)

The mother was the parent who undertook all required research before theselection of the various health care providers for the child. The mother was alsothe lead parent regarding the child’s daycare selection, registration in thepreschool program at the local elementary school soon after the child was bornand has been the parent who is interacted with all these professionals;

about the child taking almond milk and the iron supplement and prune juice;

(j)

The father has attended most if not all of the required healthcare professionals butthat he takes a secondary role in listening to the advice being provided. If he

disagreements, the parties agree with most of the professional advice beingprovided;

(k)

The mother to be very controlling in her relationship with the father regarding thechild. Her position before the court regarding vacations was that Aden is tooyoung to be away from her for more than a week until age 5. Despite the partiesbeing separated, her position is that if the child goes to Kenya on vacation, bothparties must travel with the child and that once in Kenya, each would haveexclusive vacation time with the child;

(l)

The father has had a role in all major decisions regarding his child and has alwaysacted in the child’s best interests;

(m)

The parties are able to communicate and able to make decisions regarding the bestinterests of their child despite their separation and this litigation;

(n)

The conflict regarding major decisions regarding the child have been sporadic.
Currently, the parties agree on where the child will go to school, who his dentistis, his family doctor, ophthalmologists, daycare provider, the activities he isregistered in. The parties have minor differences of opinion regarding almondmilk and iron supplements\prune juice. The mother’s use of the puffer has beenresolved to the father’s satisfaction over the past winter;

(o)

The parties have been able to put their differences aside and make decisions forand in the best interest of their child; and,

(p)

Since the child’s birth, both parties have had input into all major decisionsaffecting the child and I see no reason to grant either parent sole decision-makingpower.

requires clarification, he will ask questions. However, other than the noted

[70]

I find that the conflict has been sporadic and usually concerns certain specific medical

issues that are currently resolved. I find that the conflict, when it has occurred, has not had anreasonably well and put their child’s interests ahead of their own.

[71]

Consequently, I order that the parties are to have joint custody on all decisions affecting

this child’s life including but not limited to decisions regarding the child’s education, health,activities and religion.
RESIDENTIAL ARRANGEMENTS

[72]

The mother does not like the current schedule because there is a five day gap with her not

having contact with Aden and that once he starts school in September 2017, he will need stabilityand he is too young to be separated from her for that length of time.
The mother’s position is that the father should have the child from Wednesday after

[73]

daycare until Friday morning in week one. The parties agree on this point.

[74]

During the second week, the mother proposes that the father has the child Monday at 4:30

p.m. from daycare Tuesday morning at 8:30 a.m. to daycare and from Friday at 4:30 p.m. until8:30 a.m. on Monday morning. The result is that in a 14 day period, the mother would have thechild 8 nights and the father 6 nights while the father’s proposal is that in the same 14 dayperiod, the parties would each have 7 nights with the child. The mother states that the child needsa sense of home and a stable schedule and that the child requires more bonding time with themother.

[75]

The father proposed to maintain the status quo because there is very little interaction

between the parents and it affords each parent to have the child equal time.

[76]

I make the following findings of fact:
(a)

Both parties have the ability to parent the child;

(b)

The parents live close to each other in the same area of Ottawa;

impact on the child and that the parties have been able to shelter the child from any conflict

(c)

The child will be starting elementary school in September 2017;

(d)

The child is bonded and loved by both parents;

(e)

The father’s time with his child has increased since November 2014;

(f)

No evidence was provided indicating that the child has not adjusted well to theschedule changes. Despite the mother believing the child’s was suffering fromseparation anxiety, she did not seek medical advice. I find that in all othercircumstances, the mother investigates, educates herself and seeks medical adviceregarding an issue regarding her son. Despite alleging that the child was clingyand was exhibiting signs of separation anxiety, she took no action to seek medicaladvice; and,

(g)

[77]

The child is four years of age.

In the circumstances, I find it in the child’s best interests that both parents have the child

for an equal amount of time. Consequently, I order that the residential arrangements for the childwill be as follows:

Week OneThe child will be with the father from Wednesday at 4:30 p.m. until

the mother.
Week TwoThe child would be with the father from Monday at 4:30 p.m. toWednesday morning to daycare at 8:30 a.m. and from Friday at 430 p.m.
to Monday morning to daycare at 8:30 a.m. The rest of the week, thechild will be with the mother.

[78]

Once the child starts school at Forest Valley Elementary School in September 2017, the

pickup and drop off will be at the school and or daycare as applicable. If the child is not inschool or daycare, the pick up or drop off will be as agreed to by the parties.
CHILD SUPPORT

[79]

The father’s position is that there should be no table child support payable because the

parties have had shared custody of the child and that the party’s incomes are equal. The father’sbasis for shared custody is that all of the time that the child was in daycare, the time is to beshared equally between the parties. Based on that calculation he has met the 40% threshold ofsection 9 of the Federal Child Support Guidelines, S.O.R./97-175, as amended (“Guidelines”)

[80]

The mother seeks full table child support effective October 2014. Firstly, the mother’s

argument is the father did not meet the 40% threshold required for a shared custody arrangementuntil October 2016. Secondly, as the father unilaterally changed the access schedule in October2016, she argues that one party cannot unilaterally keep the child in order to produce a 40%
figure as set out in Ness v Ness 1999 BCCA 261 where the Court stated paragraph 22:
Clearly, one party cannot unilaterally insist on keeping the children over extratime in order to produce the 40% figure. The calculation in this case must bebased on the order made by Mr. Justice Blair. By my calculation, Mr. Ness, under

Friday morning to daycare. The rest of the week, the child will be with

Mr. Justice Blair’s order, does not have physical custody of the children for 40%
of the time. Accordingly, s.9 is not applicable in this case.
Thirdly, in the alternative, the mother submits that the father has not discharged his onus

to show that the table amount of child support is inappropriate in the circumstances. In support ofthat submission, the father has failed to provide child expense budgets to consider both fixed andvariable costs and evidence as to the ability of each parent to assume any increased cost ofshared custody by considering income levels, disparity in incomes and the assets and liabilitiesand net worth of each party.
Shared custody9. Where a spouse exercises a right of access to, or has physical custody of, achild for not less than 40 per cent of the time over the course of a year, theamount of the child support order must be determined by taking into account
(a) the amounts set out in the applicable tables for each of the spouses;
(b) the increased costs of shared custody arrangements; and
(c) the conditions, means, needs and other circumstances of each spouse and ofany child for whom support is sought.

[82]

I have considered the following principles:
(a)

Where the 40% threshold is met, the court must proceed under section 9 of theGuidelines in calculating child support. (L. v. C., 2013 ONSC 1801);

(b)

The parent relying on section 9 of the Guidelines has the burden of proof toestablish that the 40% threshold has been met.(L. v. C. supra);

(c)

There is no universally accepted method for determining the 40 percent of timethat triggers s. 9 of the Guidelines (Froom v. Froom (2005), 11 R.F.L. (6th) 254
(Ont. C.A.);

(d)

The court should avoid rigid calculations and instead look at whether physicalcustody of the children is truly shared (Froom, supra para. 2);

[81]

(e)

The overwhelming weight of authority in Ontario and other provinces supportcalculating the 40% threshold on an hourly basis. When calculating time in hours,

a year (Khairzad v. McFarlane, supra at para. 68);
(f)

The relevant period for the calculation of time under section 9 is the amount oftime that the child is in the general care and control of the parent, and not the timethat the parent is physically present with the child. (L. v. L., supra, at para 38);

(g)

The calculation includes the time the child spends in swimming lessons, at daycare, at school, or with a nanny, so long as the parent claiming this time is theparent who during that period is “responsible for their well-being” (Sirdevan v.
Sirdevan, [2009] O.J. No. 3796 [(S.C.)]);

(h)

In determining who is responsible for the children during school time, the courtshould look at criteria including where both parents (a) are on the contact list atthe school, (b) are proximate and available during school hours, (c) are probablyresponsible for enrolling the children, (d) go to parent teacher meeting, (e) signreport cards and journals, (f) pay for daycare. (g) sign notes to the teacher and (h)
respond to telephone messages from school. (Ferguson v. Ferguson, 2005
PESCTD 16, 246 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 204);

(i)

“Calculation of time with each parent is not a rigid exercise. Parentalresponsibility, not minutes, is the primary consideration. Time sleeping and timeat school cannot be ignored.”(Law v. Law, 2011 ONSC 2140, at para. 67, Sloan,J); and,

(j)

The application of section 9 rests on more than a mere set off calculation andrequires the court to consider the reality of how expenses for the children are metin each parent’s household, not assume that time spent equals money spent.
(Fraser, supra at paragraph 80).

the 40% threshold is met if the parent has the child in their care for 3504 hours in

Analysis

[83]

Since the mother returned to work in March 2014, the parties agreed that when the

the father lived minutes from the daycare while the mother was working in Gatineau, Québec.

[84]

This is not a case where the father was responsible for the child until 8:15 a.m. when he

brought the child to daycare and then had access to the child later on any specific date. In theparticular facts of this case, and on the specific arrangement reach by the parties, the father wasresponsible with the mother for the child while the child was in daycare.

[85]

The 40% of time calculation must be over the course of the entire year. In one year there

are 8760 hours. The father must reach 3504 hours to cross the 40% threshold.

[86]

I find that in 2014, the father did have the child more than 40% of the year because the

parties shared the child equally and lived together until November 7, 2014 and then theyfollowed the first schedule.

[87]

In 2015, I find that the father had the child two different periods of time. From January

2015 to August 26, 2015, he had the child 67.5 hours x 33.71 weeks equals 2275.71 hours. FromAugust 26, 2015 to December 31, 2015, the father had the child 79.25 hours per week x 18.29
weeks equals 1449.48 hours. In addition, the father had the child for 2 weeks of vacation andMarch break totalling 322.23 hours. The total hours in 2015 are 4047 hours being well over therequired 3504.

[88]

From January 1 to October 25, 2016, I find that the father had the child 79.25 hours x 39

weeks equals 3090 plus as of October 2016, the father has had equal time totalling 924 hours. Asof October 25, 2016, the parties have had shared custody of the child.

[89]

I find that to grant to the mother, all the time that the child was in daycare since

November 2014 would be to ignore the specific agreement that the parties reached. This fatherwas responsible for the child during the day. He was 5 minutes away from the daycare. The

mother was at work, the father would be responsible for the child. The parties acknowledged that

mother was over 30 to 40 minutes away in Gatineau. I find that this child was and remains in thegeneral care and control of the father during the day.
Based on the above analysis and sharing the daycare time between both parties and

considering the parental responsibility for this child, I find that the father has met his burden ofproof that he had the child more than 40% of the time since separation.
Shared custody

[91]

Having found that the parties have been in a shared custody arrangement pursuant to

section 9 of the Guidelines, the amount of the child support order must be determined by takinginto account:
(a)

the amounts set out in the applicable tables for each of the spouses;

(b)

the increased costs of shared custody arrangements; and

(c)

the conditions, means, needs and other circumstances of each spouse and of anychild for whom support is sought.

[92]

In Contino v. Leonelli-Contino, 2005 SCC 63, [2005] 3 S.C.R. 217, the Supreme Court of

Canada provided a step-by-step method of calculation of child support in shared custodyarrangements. The principles of Contino are as follows:

(a) All three factors in subsections (a), (b), and (c) of section 9 of the Guidelinesmust be given equal weight;

(b) It is not appropriate to apply any form of fixed mathematical formula tocalculate child support in shared custody cases;

(c) The starting point is the set-off described in section 9(a) of the Guidelines;
(d) Appropriate evidence must be provided to the court to enable the considerationof subsection 9(b) and 9(c); and

[90]

(e) There is no presumption that the quantum of child support in a shared custodycase should be more or less than the table amount of child support payable by

Income determination

[93]

A spouse’s annual income is determined by the court in accordance with section 16 to 20

of the Federal Child Support Guidelines. (s. 15 Guidelines). A spouse’s annual income isdetermined using the sources of income set out under the heading “Total Income” in the T1
General form issued by the Canada revenue agency (s. 16 Guidelines).

[94]

The father’s income is calculated as follows:
(a)

In 2012, the father’s Notice of Reassessment indicates that his line 150 incomewas $85,188 of which $75,387 was employment income, gross rental income was
$11,451 and net rental income was $9801;

(b)

In 2013, the father’s Notice of Reassessment indicates that he had a line 150
income of $80,458 of which $70,678 was employment income and net rentalincome of $9780. During the father’s testimony, he stated that he deducted repairsto his condo in 2013 but failed to deduct the condo fees mortgage and otherexpenses. On a review of the father’s financial statements, they indicate that hehad a debt to ING Direct of $82,650 on the date of marriage and $76,300 on thedate of separation;

(c)

In 2014, the father’s line 150 income was $72,770.38 based on employmentincome of $73,762 and rental income loss of $993.62. In 2014, the fathercompleted a statement of real estate rentals arriving at a loss of $993.62;

(d)

In 2015, the father’s Notice of Assessments indicates that his line 150 income was
$87,600. The father did not produce a T1 general income tax return. The fathertestified that he made a mistake as he should have not included the rental income

the payor.

without the rental expenses as he had done in 2014 which provided a loss of
$993.62; and,In 2016, the father produced no evidence as to his annual income amount save andexcept the financial statement sworn September 22, 2016 which attached a paystub for the period ending September 10, 2016 showing that his income year todate was $57,398.83.

[95]

The father submits that I should not use the line 150 income on his income tax returns as

they are wrong because they fail, except for 2014, to deduct the expenses related to his rentalunit. He submits that his annual income is approximately $72,000. The burden of proof is on thefather to prove his income. At the trial, he indicated that he had made mistakes and failed toproperly complete his income tax return. I have trouble accepting that the father failed toproperly complete his return considering his education including an MBA and his workexperience.

[96]

I find that the parties income was as follows:
(a)

In the year 2014, I find that the mother earned $40,611.76 and the father earned
$72,770.38;

(b)

In the year 2015, I find that the mother earned $72,762 and the father earned
$87,600; and,

(c)

In the year 2016, I find that the mother earned $72,762 and the father earned
$72,000.

[97]

Ms. Nems came to live with the father in October 2015 and paid him $2000 per month.

From January 2016 to August 2016, the father and Ms. Nems’ relationship remained as her beinga boarder. In September 2016, the father’s relationship with Ms. Nems became romantic and thather contribution should no longer be calculated as income added to the father’s total income inthe year.

(e)

[98]

Subject to sections 17 to 20 of the Guidelines, a spouse’s annual income is determined

using the sources of income set out under the heading “total income” in the T1 general form

Guidelines).

[99]

The mother submits that that money paid by Ms. Nems being $2000 per month should be

included as income for the father in calculating child support. She requests that the months ofOctober through December 2014 being $6000 should be grossed up by 25% to account forincome taxes to arrive at a figure of $8000 which should be added as rental income to thefather’s total income in 2015.

[100] The mother submits that the sum of $2000 per month times for January through August2015 being $16,000 should be grossed up by 25% to arrive at a figure of $20,000 which shouldbe added as rental income to the father’s total income in 2016. The father opposes this request.

[101] In Crabtree v Crabtree, 2009, O.J. No. 1466, the Court did not include into the payor’sincome money received from boarders in a communal living situation. In that decision, JusticeBlishen found that the payor and the boarder shared the kitchen, living room, bathroom and allcontribute to household expenses. The payor characterized the arrangement as a communalliving situation enabling everyone to reside together for a reduced cost. The payor did not reportthe boarder’s contribution on his income tax return. The Court refused to impute the incomebased on the arrangements with the borders because of the following reasons:
(a)

the payments toward household expenses made by the boarders was not incomeincluded on line 150 of the payor’s tax return. The onus fell on the payee to provethat they should be included;

(b)

the monies received were for sharing all expenses including food which wasdifferent from receiving rent from tenants in an investment property;

(c)

although the pay or arguably benefits by reduce mortgage and other cause, theboarders were really just paying for what they were using and therefore is difficultto quantify the benefit to the pay or; and,

issued by the Canada Revenue Agency and is adjusted in accordance with schedule III (s. 16

(d)

the payor was not offsetting all household costs when considering both hispersonal proportion contributions and those of the boarders where the monthly

[102] I find that the situation in this matter is analogous to the Crabtree decision. I will notinclude Ms. Nems’ contribution as income because the income was not listed on the father’sincome tax return, the contribution was to share in the food eaten by the two adults and twochildren and there is no evidence of whether or not the contribution was in excess or below of theactual expenses. Further, even if Ms. Nems’ contribution was characterized as “rental income”,the father would be entitled to make deductions from that income.
November 2014 to December 2014

[103] The mother filed her Answer March 11, 2015 where she sought child support from thefather in accordance with the Guidelines.

[104] Neither party provided childcare budget amounts save and except as stated in theirfinancial statements. I have not received any evidence with respect to the increased cost of ashared custody arrangement.

[105] I find that during the year 2014, the parties shared custody of the child. Full table childsupport owed by the father was $1,075 per month while the shared custody set off amount was
$485 per month based on the father’s table amount of $1,075 per month and the mother’s tableamount of $590 per month.

[106] I find that taking all factors into consideration, including the parties income, theirfinancial statements and shared custody, the father should have paid the mother child support of
$500 per month as child support for a total of $1,000.
Year 2015

[107] In 2015, starting with the set off calculation, the father should have paid the mother $782
per month based on an income of $87,600 and the mother should pay the father the sum of $663

costs were $3000 and the boarders were considering $1410.

per month based on an annual income of $72,762 resulting in an amount owing by the father of
$119 per month.

support is inappropriate.

In the alternative, she submits that the father should pay $450 per

month being half way between $663 per month and $119 per month.

[109] While I do not have childcare budgets, I am aware that the father earned approximately
$15,000 more in 2015. In my discretion, I order the father to pay the mother child support in theamount of $300 per month for the months of January through December 2015.
Year 2016 and forward

[110] In 2016, I have found that both parties have approximately the same amount of incomeand in those circumstances, I will not make any order for support payable by either party.
Arrears

[111] The father did not pay any child support until the fall of 2016 when he delivered a chequein the amount of $24,203 to the mother of which the sum of $21,217 was payment by the fatherfor the equalization payment. The difference being the sum of $2,986 was paid by the father as acredit towards any child support owing by him to the mother for the period of November 2014 toAugust 2015. The sum of $2,986 was arrived at by the father making the following calculations:
(a)

$5,913 representing the sum of $657 per month for a nine-month period based ona set off calculation performed by the father;

(b)

Less the sum of $2280 representing half of the child tax benefits received by themother for a 24 month period; and,

(c)

Less the sum of $631 representing an overpayment of daycare expenses calculatedby the father.

[112] Since the birth of the child, the mother has been in receipt of the child tax benefitcheques. She testified that after the birth of Aden until she returned to work, she used such

[108] The mother submits that the father has not met his burden of proof that the full table

cheque to pay for her own expenses. When she returned to work, she contributed $150 per monthto registered educational savings plan (RESP) in the child’s name. Further, she accumulatedthe child’s life that she used to support herself. She then contributed that lump sum amount to theRESP.

[113] Currently, the mother is contributing $150 per month to the RESP and as of September23, 2016, had a balance of $8,968.30.

[114] I find that the arrears of child support owing by the father is the sum of $4,600. Thisamount is to set off against the sum of $2,986 leaving a balance owing of $1,614 to be paidwithin 30 days of this judgment.
LIFE INSURANCE

[115] Both parties have life insurance policies with Sun Life insurance in the amount of
$500,000.

[116] The father proposes that both parties maintain the child as the beneficiary of a lifeinsurance policy in the amount of $180,000 while the mother proposes of the father maintain alife insurance policy in the amount of $225,000.

[117] In Katz v. Katz, 2014 ONCA 606, 377 D.L.R. (4th) 264, the Court of Appeal canvassedthe issue of life insurance securing support obligations and provided the following principles:
a)
The Court is given broad discretion to impose terms, conditions, andrestrictions in connection with an order for child or spousal support, including thepower to order a spouse to obtain insurance to secure the payment, to be bindingon the payor’s estate; andb)
The factors to be considered in determining the quantum of the lifeinsurance, once the issue of insurability and cost of the insurance is resolved, areas follows: the amount of life insurance cannot exceed the amount of supportpayable over the duration of the support order; the amount of insurance to bemaintained should decline over time as the amount of spousal support payablewill diminish over the duration of the award; the obligation to maintain insuranceshould end when the support obligation ends; and the court should first order thatthe support obligation is binding on the payor’s estate.

savings equal to the amount of the child tax benefit cheque that she received in the first year of

Analysis

[118] I have considered the following factors in arriving at my decision regarding life

(a)

Under the Divorce Act, I have jurisdiction to order the respondent to obtain andmaintain life insurance to secure his payment of a support obligation;

(b)

Under the Divorce Act, I have jurisdiction to order the support obligation to bebinding on the respondent’s estate;

(c)

I have found that the parties will have joint custody of their child and currentlythere is no child support payable by either party based on the approximately equalamounts of income by both parties;

(d)

I find that both parties should have life insurance in place to secure theirobligation to pay child support;

(e)

I find that both parties have life insurance; and,

(f)

The mother has provided a DivorceMate calculation indicating that if the fatherpaid the mother child support of $782 plus $409 per month towards child careexpenses, the life insurance estimate would be $164,412. This calculation does notinclude post-secondary education and is based on the father paying the mother atable amount of child support which is not the situation at this time.

[119] Taking into consideration that the child is 4 years of age, that his residential arrangementsmay vary and that the parties incomes may change as well as the child’s needs, in thecircumstances, I order both parties to designate the other as the irrevocable beneficiary in trustfor Aden of a life insurance policy in the amount of $180,000 and to provide proof of the saiddesignation within 30 days of this judgment.

[120] In the event that life insurance is not in place at the time of the death of one of theparents, the sum of $180,000 shall be the first charge against his or her estate.

insurance:

Divorce

[121] The parties separated on September 12, 2014, have not reconciled and there is no chance

Spousal Support

[122] The mother withdrew her claim for spousal support.
Partial Minutes of Settlement

[123]

On January 17, 2017, the parties filed Partial Minutes of Settlement where they agree on

the sharing of specific holidays and acknowledging that they have settled the equalization of thenet family property with the father paying the mother an equalization payment of $21,217, whichthe mother acknowledges she has received. Further, the parties agreed the father has paid themother a cheque in the amount of $24,203 representing the equalization payment and the balanceis paid without prejudice to the mother’s right to pursue retroactive child support.
Disposition

[124] Based on the foregoing, I order as follows:
(a)

A divorce order shall issue;

(b)

The parties shall have joint custody of Aden Kayo Wachira, born March 11, 2013
and shall make all major decisions regarding the child jointly;

(c)

The parent residing with the child at all relevant time make daily decisionsaffecting the child’s welfare;

(d)

The child will reside with the father as follows:
Week OneThe child will be with the father from Wednesday at 4:30 p.m. until Fridaymorning to daycare.

of reconciliation. In the circumstances, an order of the divorce shall issue.

Week TwoThe child would be with the father from Monday at 4:30 p.m. to Wednesday

to daycare at 8:30 a.m.

(e)

The parties shall keep each other up to date with regards to the child’s curricularand extracurricular activities. Neither party shall register the child in an activitywhich takes place during the other party’s time with the child without the consentof the other parent;

(f)

Both parties shall be entitled to have a copy of the child’s report cards, notice ofall school events and activities, medical reports and such other documentationrelating to the child provided them directly and each shall cooperate with the otherto ensure that both receive same;

(g)

Both parties shall be entitled to community directly with all professionalsinvolved with the child, including but not limited to medical, dental, educational,professionals and each shall cooperate with the other to ensure that both partiesare able to do so;

(h)

In the event that the child needs emergency medical care, each parent shall beentitled to make any decisions and provide any instructions necessary, to see tothe care of the child on an urgent basis. The party in whose care the child is at thetime of the emergency shall promptly notify the other parent of the emergency assoon as is it is safe to do so;

(i)

The mother shall retain the child’s birth certification and the father shall retain thechild’s passport. These documents shall be provided to the other parent shouldthey require same and once the stated purpose has been fulfilled, that parent shallreturn same to the care of the parent in whose possession the document was;

morning to daycare at 8:30 a.m. and from Friday at 430 p.m. to Monday morning

(j)

The father shall be responsible to ensure that the child has a valid passport andshall renew same as required. The mother shall cooperate with the renewing or

days of having received them from the father. The cost of renewing or replacing apassport for the child shall be divided equally between the parties;

(k)

The child’s OHIP card shall travel with the child between the home of the parents;

(l)

If either party plans a vacation with the child, that parent will give the other adetailed itinerary at least 60 days before the commencement of the vacation,including the name of any flight carrier and flight times, accommodations,including address and telephone numbers and details as to how to contact the childduring the trip. Within 10 days of receiving such information, that party shall, inwriting, confirm to the other whether or not they are prepared to consent to theproposed travel. Should such consent not be forthcoming, the other party shall beat liberty to apply to court for an order directing the party proposing the travels todo so and that the other party shall immediately deliver all documentationnecessary to accomplish such travel as may be within the power of that party,together with an order directing the cost of making such application shall bepayable by the defaulting party on the full indemnity scale;

(m)

If either party plans a vacation outside of Canada with the child, the travellingparent will provide the other parent with a travel consent authorizing the child totravel for the other parent to execute and have notarized at the travelling parent’sexpense. Said travel consent authorization provided within 14 days of receipt;

(n)

The parent who attends to travel with the child shall be responsible for all thenecessary immunizations and will follow all necessary medical protocol prior todeparture;

(o)

In the event that either party are to travel with the child to a location in which themedical\dental\travel insurance are not in effect, the parent travelling with the

replacement of the passport shall execute and return any documents within 10

child shall acquire, at his or her own expense, such medical\dental\travelinsurance as may be necessary to ensure the child while he is away;This holiday parenting schedule shall be in addition to the regular parentingschedule identified in which remains to be determined and overrides the regularparenting schedule in the event of a conflict;1. As long as Family Day is not a statutory holiday for the mother,the child shall be in the father’s care every Family Day from 8:30
a.m. until 4:30 p.m. At 4:30 p.m., the regular schedule resumes.
2. If Family Day becomes a statutory holiday for the mother, thechild shall be with the mother in even-numbered years and withthe father in odd-numbered years, from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. At4:30 p.m., the regular schedule resumes.
3. In odd numbered years beginning in 2015, the child shall residewith the mother at the following times: on December 24th until2:30 p.m.: from December 25th at noon until 4:00 p.m. onDecember 26th , from December 28th at 8:30 a.m. until January 1stat noon.
4. In odd numbered years beginning in 2015, the child shall residewith the father at the following times: on December 24 th at 2:30
p.m. until December 25th at noon, from December 26th at 4:00
p.m. until December 28th at 8:30 a.m.: from January 1st at noonuntil January 5th at 8:30 a.m.
5. The father shall be responsible for pickups and drop offs, saveand except for the pick up on December 25 th at noon and January1st at 8:30 a.m. drop off. The mother shall transport the child onthese two dates and times.

(p)

6. The Christmas schedule able shall be reversed in even numberedyears commencing in 2016.

shall govern March Break. However, in the event that a parentwishes to travel with the child during March Break, they shall beentitled to do so, so long as they provide notice to the other parentby no later than February 1 of that year and the schedule forMarch Break shall be adjusted accordingly.
8. Should there be a conflict between the parents where each parentwishes to travel with the child during the same year, the fathershall have priority to travel with the child during off numberedyear and the mother during even numbered years.
9. The child shall be with the mother on Good Friday in oddnumbered years and with the father in even numbered years, from8:30 a.m. until 4:30 p.m. At 4:30 p.m., the regular scheduleresumes.
10. As long as Easter Monday is not a statutory holiday for the father,the child shall be in the mother’s care every Easter Monday from8:30 a.m. until 4:30 p.m. At 4:30 p.m., the regular scheduleresumes.
11. If Easter Monday becomes a statutory holiday for the father, thechild shall be with the father in odd-numbered years and with themother in even-numbered years, from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. At4:30 p.m., the regular schedule resumes.
12. The child shall be with the mother on Victoria Day weekend ineven numbered years and with the father in odd numbered years

7. Once the child is attending school, the regular parenting schedule

from 8:30 a.m. on Monday morning until Tuesday morning at8:30 a.m. At 8:30 a.m. the regular schedule resumes.

shall spend Mother’s Day from Sunday at 9:30 a.m. until 7:00
p.m. with the mother. The father shall drop the child off at thefather’s home at 7:00 p.m.
14. If Father’s Day falls on the mother’s schedule weekend, the childshall spend Father’s Day from Sunday at 9:30 a.m. until 7:00 p.m.
with the father. The father shall drop the child off at the mother’shome at 7:00 p.m.
15. The child shall be with the father on Canada Day weekend in oddnumbered years and with the father in even numbered years from8:30 a.m. on Monday morning until Tuesday morning at 8:30 a.m.
At 8:30 a.m. the regular schedule resumes.
16. The child shall be with the mother in even numbered years andwith the father in odd numbered years, from 8:30 a.m. on Mondaymorning until Tuesday morning at 8:30 a.m. At 8:30, the regularschedule resumes.
17. The child shall be with the mother in odd numbered years withthe father in even numbered years, from 8:30 a.m. on Mondaymorning until Tuesday morning at 8:30 a.m. At 8:30 a.m. theregular schedule resumes.
18. In even numbered years, the child shall be in the father’s care onThanksgiving Monday from 8:30 a.m. until 4:30 p.m. and in themother’s care in odd numbered years. At 4:30 p.m. the regularschedule resumes.

13. If Mother’s Day falls on the father’s schedule weekend, the child

(q)

The father shall pay to the mother the sum of $1,614 representing the arrears ofchild support within 30 days of this judgment;Commencing June 1, 2017, neither party shall pay table child support to the otherbased on shared parenting and equal incomes.

(s)

The parties shall share in proportion to their annual income the child’s section 7
expenses set out pursuant to the Guidelines including but not limited to thedaycare expense;

(t)

Both parties shall designate Aden as a beneficiary of their extended medical anddental policy available through her employment for so long as the benefit isavailable and the child is entitled to support;

(u)

Both parties shall designate the other as the irrevocable beneficiary in trust forAden of a policy of life insurance in the amount of $180,000; shall provide proofof said designation within 30 days of this judgment and in the event that a parentdies without said insurance in place, the amount of $180,000 shall be the firstcharge on their estate; and,

(v)

The Applicant owes the Respondent the sum of $21,217.00 as an equalizationpayment, which payment has been made.

COSTS

[125] I encourage the parties to settle the issue of costs by June 9, 2017. If they cannot, thefather to provide his costs submissions not to exceed three pages plus a bill of costs and anyoffers to settle by June 16, 2017. The mother shall file her costs submissions not to exceed threepages plus a bill of costs and any offers to settle by June 30, 2017.

Shelston J.

(r)

Released: May 29, 2017

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
Alex Wachira NderituApplicant
– and –
Wathira KamojiRespondent

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Shelston J.
Released: May 29, 2017

CITATION: Nderitu v Kamoji, 2017 ONSC 2617
COURT FILE NO.: FC-15-258
DATE: 2017/05/29

