CITATION: New Tecumseth (Town) v. Dallard, 2017 ONSC 2853
COURT FILE NO.: 16-1561
DATE: 20170510

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

The Corporation of the Town of New
Tecumseth
Applicant )
– and –
Norman Dallard
Respondent )

Colleen E. Butler, Counsel for the Applicant

Kevin Kemp, Counsel for the Respondent

HEARD: April 27, 2017

REASONS FOR DECISION
BOSWELL J.

[1]
Selling ice cream has always looked appealing to me. It looks like one of those jobs, likeflower delivery or greeting card writing, that generally makes people happy.

[2]
But looks can, as we all know, be misleading. Norman Dallard runs an ice cream shop.
Not everyone is happy. The Town of New Tecumseth wants to shut him down for what they seeas infractions of their zoning by-laws.

[3]
Mr. Dallard says he has done his best to be compliant and that, in any event, the Town isunfairly targeting him and being unreasonable in their demands.

[4]
The following reasons explain why I am satisfied that zoning infractions have been madeout, but why a less drastic remedy than a full injunction is appropriate.

ONTARIO

[5]

I begin with some background information.

[6]
The Town of New Tecumseth includes, principally, the three communities of Alliston,Beeton and Tottenham. The dispute in this instance arises in the heart of Alliston.

[7]
Victoria Street is Alliston’s main thoroughfare. It dissects the community on an eastwest axis. Outside of the community’s limits, it is known as Highway 89. Within those limits itis the center of the downtown core; home to numerous businesses, shops, restaurants, a highschool, and personal residences.

[8]
Mr. Dallard owns a residence on the corner of Victoria Street and Downey Avenue, onthe eastern side of Alliston. He is several blocks east of the main downtown area. His residencefronts onto Downey Avenue, which runs north-south. He has a large side lot on the north side ofhis property running up to and abutting Victoria Street.

[9]
In the area of Victoria Street and Downey Avenue there are a number of home-based,small businesses. Mr. Dallard’s business is one of them.

[10] Mr. Dallard had a garage on the north side of his property. He converted the garage to anice cream shop. He knocked out a large entranceway in the north side of the garage wall. Overthe entranceway is a large banner sign advertising the name of the business, “What’s the ScoopIce Cream Parlour”. There is another modest-sized, free-standing, double-pole sign on the sideyard advertising Kawartha Lakes Ice Cream, with an arrow pointing south down DowneyAvenue.

[11] There is a modest-sized paving stone patio just outside the entranceway to the parlour.
The patio extends into the backyard of the Dallard residence where, during open-season, there issome patio furniture apparently available for patrons to sit at to enjoy their ice cream. There is alarge wooden pentagonal picnic table on the north lawn, also apparently available for patrons tosit at.

[12] The north side lot had a large deciduous tree of some sort that has been cut back toessentially a large stump. It has numerous Canadian flags affixed to it.
THE ZONING BY-LAW

[13]

Land use in New Tecumseth is regulated by Zoning By-law 2014-126 (the “By-law”).

[14] Mr. Dallard’s property is zoned Urban Residential 1 (UR1) under Schedule “A” to theBy-law.

[15]

Section 6.2 of the By-law permits the following uses within a UR1 zone:
(a)

Accessory Use and Building;

WHAT’S THE SCOOP

(b)

Bed and Breakfast facilities; and,

(c)

Single, detached dwelling.

[16] Section 4.10 of the By-law permits a home-based business as an accessory use of aresidential property in a UR1 zone, provided the following conditions are met:
(a)

The home occupation is clearly subordinate to the residential use;

(b)

No external evidence of the home occupation, including that of a parking area notassociated with the principal use, except for a lawful sign, which would indicatethat any part of the building is being used for any purpose other than for residentialpurposes;

(c)

No open storage of materials, equipment or goods associated with the homeoccupation shall be permitted;

(d)

No home occupation shall occupy more than 25% of the total floor area of thedwelling unit, up to a maximum of 50 m²;

(e)

A home occupation shall be contained entirely within the dwelling;

(f)

Only goods and merchandise produced on the premises, or goods and merchandiseassociated with a service conducted on the premises shall be offered or exposed forsale;

(g)

No mechanical or other equipment shall be used or kept except such as iscustomarily employed in a dwelling unit for recreational hobbies, domestic orhousehold purposes;

(h)

The home occupation shall be conducted only by members of the householdresiding on the premises and one (1) additional person not residing on the premise;

…
THE APPROVAL PROCESS

[17] Mr. Dallard initially approached the Town’s Planning Department in September 2014
inquiring about the feasibility of converting his garage into an ice cream parlour. His plan wasmotivated by a desire to help his step-daughter fund her university expenses.

[18] Andy Warzin – an Intermediate Planner with the Town – advised Mr. Dallard that aseasonal ice cream parlour could be permitted within the scope of the By-law provided s. 4.10
was complied with.

[20] In the meantime, as part of the Town’s consideration of the building permit application,Mr. Warzin sought information from Mr. Dallard as to how he proposed to operate the ice creamparlour within the provisions of s. 4.10 of the By-law. Mr. Dallard emailed the Town’s BuildingDepartment on May 6, 2015 indicating how he intended to comply with the By-law. Part of hisplan included a few Muskoka chairs outside the parlour to be used by patrons.

[21] Ultimately Mr. Warzin, on behalf of the Planning Department, approved the business forzoning compliance on May 26, 2015. The approval was subject to the business being operatedwithin the provisions of s. 4.10 of the By-law. The request for Muskoka chairs was notapproved, given the requirement that there be no external evidence of the home businessoperation.

[22]

The business was subsequently opened in June 2015.

COMPLIANCE ISSUES

[23] By-law enforcement in the Town of New Tecumseth is complaint-based. In other words,save perhaps in the case of parking infractions, by-laws are only enforced if and when acomplaint about non-compliance is registered with the Town.

[24] On June 22, 2015 the Town received a complaint regarding the parking of cars onDowney Avenue in connection with the operation of the ice cream parlour. Two enforcementofficers were assigned to the file: Mike Coe and Malcolm McRae. The concerns about parkingspread into a more fulsome investigation of general compliance with the By-law.

[25]

Violations noted by the investigators over the ice cream season of 2015 include:
(a)

Sign violations. Mr. Dallard has, as I indicated, a large banner sign above theentrance doors to the shop. He has a two-post, fixed sign on the lawn. He has alsoused a portable A-frame, “sandwich board” sign on his lawn. He has an LED
“Open” sign in one window of the parlour and a “Kawartha Lakes” sign in anotherwindow. Mr. Dallard had no permit for any of the signs during the summer of2015. He applied for a permit under the applicable signage by-law in the summerof 2015, after his signs were already in place. He was turned down. A similarapplication was approved in April 2016 in relation to the banner sign and fixed-postsign, but none of the others;

(b)

The presence of patio tables and chairs, Muskoka chairs, and the pentagonal picnictable, where patrons sit and eat their ice cream. These are, in the Town’s view,external evidence of a business; and,

(c)

Multiple Canadian flags affixed to the tree stump on the north side lawn of thepremises.

[19] Mr. Dallard proceeded to submit an application for a building permit in relation to thegarage renovations on April 8, 2015. While the application was being considered by the Town,Mr. Dallard went ahead with the construction without the permit.

[27] Mr. Dallard was subsequently charged with failing to comply with the Town’s zoning bylaw and sign by-law. He pled guilty to one count of carrying on a business contrary to theTown’s zoning by-law.

[28] In January 2016, Mr. Dallard filed a minor variance application with the Town’sCommittee of Adjustments. He sought approval to permit external evidence of a homeoccupation by way of a patio area outside the ice cream parlour. His application was denied. Hedid not appeal the result.

[29] Mr. Dallard nevertheless constructed a patio on the north-east portion of the property, justeast of the doors to the ice cream parlour. The patio is partially fenced and is essentially in therear yard of the residence. Nothing prevents patrons from accessing the area and using patiofurniture situated there. Indeed, it would appear that patrons do use that area. The area is visiblefrom both Victoria Street and Downey Avenue.

[30]

Violations noted by the Town’s investigators during the 2016 season include:
(a)

The expanded use of the patio, as noted;

(b)

The continued use of the Muskoka chairs and pentagonal table;

(c)

Two “Open” signs in the windows, one being an LED sign, as well as the KawarthaLakes sign in one window;

(d)

Multiple employees working at different times; and,

(e)

Numerous Canadian flags on the tree stump.

[31] On July 8, 2016 the Town served Mr. Dallard with notice of non-compliance and orderedhim to comply with the By-law within 5 days. He did not do so.

[32] A second compliance letter was delivered on July 18, 2016. Again, no changes wereeffected by Mr. Dallard.

[33] Ultimately further charges were laid under the Provincial Offences Act for noncompliance with the By-law. Those charges remain outstanding.

[34] Notably, no parking violations have ever been identified or documented, despite what I
would characterize as a rather thorough and time-consuming investigation over the past twoyears.

[26] Mr. Dallard attended meetings with Town officials on June 29, 2015 and July 17, 2015
where By-law violations were discussed. He was instructed to remove all external evidence ofthe business. He did not do so. On July 6, 2015 he received a notice from the Town that he haduntil July 8 to remove all patio chairs and tables and all signs until he had obtained the properpermits. He did not do so.

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

[36] The Town asserts that Mr. Dallard has flaunted the conditions under which his approvalwas granted. He has, amongst other things, made the operation of the ice cream parlour thepredominant use of the property; posted signs without proper approval; created obvious externalevidence of a business through signage and patio furniture; and created traffic concerns due alack of inadequate parking. He has refused to bring the operation of the business intocompliance with the By-law despite numerous demands.

[37]

They argue that Mr. Dallard is incorrigible, given the following:
(a)

The fact that he proceeded with construction of the ice cream parlour before hisbuilding permit was granted;

(b)

The fact that he built, or at least expanded, his patio despite being denied approvalto do so by the Committee of Adjustments; and,

(c)

His refusal to comply with the Town’s reasonable demands.

[38] As a result of his intransigence, the Town argues that the only feasible remedy to ensureBy-law compliance is to enjoin the operation of the business altogether.

[39] Mr. Dallard does not accept that he is in breach of the By-law. But the main thrust of hisposition focuses on the bona fides – or the alleged lack thereof – of the Town.

[40] He asserts that the Town is unfairly targeting him for enforcement when there arenumerous other home-based businesses in the area who appear to be infringing the By-law insimilar ways, without issue.

[41] He theorizes that certain members of Town council are influencing the investigation andenforcement of the By-law against him because the councilors are aligned with the owner ofanother ice cream shop located in downtown Alliston.

[42] His position, essentially, is that the court ought not to grant the Town any relief becausetheir actions are discriminatory, not motivated for valid reasons, and unfair.
DISCUSSION

[43] I will begin my analysis of the issues between the parties with the following observation.
A municipality has a broad discretion in determining by-law enforcement matters. It isconstrained only by the obligations to act reasonably and in good faith. See Foley v. Shamess,2008 ONCA 588; Donnell v. Joseph (c.o.b. WJ Moving & Storage), [2012] O.J. No. 1643.
With that general comment in mind I will address the following issues in turn:

[35] The Town’s position is straightforward. They submit that they have treated Mr. Dallardin good faith – approving his application for a home-based business, while at all times beingclear to him about the conditions under which such a business could operate.

(a)

Has the Town acted unreasonably or in bad faith?

(b)

Has the Town established By-law infractions?

(c)

If so, what remedy is appropriate?

The Conduct of the Town

[44] To be frank, on the evidentiary record before the court I am unable to conclude that theTown has acted unreasonably or in bad faith.

[45] The suggestion that one or more councilors have influenced Town officials because of aclose relationship with another ice cream vendor does not rise above speculation in my view.
Moreover, I do not have a broad enough evidentiary record to support a finding that the Townhas unreasonably targeted Mr. Dallard, when assessed against any actions they have taken withrespect to other possible By-law offenders. I simply do not know enough about what othercomplaints may have been made in relation to other properties and what, if any, enforcementsteps have been taken.

[46]

I concede that there are some peculiar aspects to this case. For instance,
(a)

I find it unusual that the Town would approve an ice cream parlour in thisresidential location, then raise concerns about parking. It is also puzzling that theycontinue to assert that parking is a problematic issue in the face of their ownevidence to the contrary;

(b)

It is also perplexing that the Town expresses such significant concern aboutexternal signs of a business when they have approved the installation and use of alarge banner sign advertising the ice cream parlour, and a fixed, two-post signdoing the same on the side lawn of the residence. In light of these obvious signs ofa business operation, I am left to wonder about the real significance of the patiofurniture and the “Open” signs.

[47] Having said that, on the record before me, I am satisfied that the Town officials haveacted reasonably and in good faith in their dealings with Mr. Dallard. In my view he was treatedentirely reasonably in terms of the initial application process, particularly in view of the fact thathe proceeded to renovate his garage without a building permit. He was initially told that an icecream parlour may be feasible, provided that the provisions of s. 4.10 of the By-law werecomplied with. He was given a copy of that section. He was told from the get-go that the patiofurniture and/or Muskoka chairs could not be used.

[48] As time went on Mr. Dallard was given fair and reasonable notice of the Town’sconcerns. He did not comply with them. It cannot be disputed that he breached the By-law in2015 because he pled guilty in Provincial Offences Court to having done so. He continued hissame offending behavior in 2016, leading me to conclude that whatever punishment wasimposed by the justice of the peace in 2015, he willingly absorbed it as a cost of doing business.

The By-law Infractions

[50]

(a)

There is external evidence of the operation of the business, beyond the two signsapproved by the Town;

(b)

The business is not contained entirely within the dwelling; and

(c)

The business has not been operated only by members of the household residing onthe premises plus one additional person not residing on the premises.

I am not satisfied that any traffic or parking violations have been made out.

[51] I am also not satisfied that the home business has become the predominant use of theproperty. The Town’s planner suggested that the residence had become subordinate to the icecream parlour based on some mathematical calculation of the area of the parlour and the patio. I
cannot agree with his conclusions. First, the ice cream parlour is only open for about 4 monthsof the year and even then only for part of each day. Second, the use of the patio is only sporadic.
Third, I infer that the balance of the home – the residence apart from the garage – is used 24
hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year as a personal residence. I am simply not persuadedthat the business comes anywhere even close to being the predominant use of the property.

[52] Of the zoning infractions that have been made out, the principal cause for concern is thepresence of external signs of a business: the patio; the Muskoka chairs; the pentagonal picnictable; the “Open” signs; the “Kawartha Lakes” sign; and the Canadian flags affixed to the treestump.

[53] Some of these external signs of an operational business are more concerning than others.
But in my view all are infractions of s. 4.10, other than the Canadian flags. The flags are notspecific to the business and, in my view, as a private property owner Mr. Dallard is entitled todemonstrate his patriotism by displaying those flags.

[54] Apart from the flags, I find that Mr. Dallard is knowingly in breach of s. 4.10 of the Bylaw. I do not mean to suggest that his knowledge of the breach is an essential element that mustbe established by the Town. I refer to his knowledge as a link back to the fairness issue heraised. He was aware when he sought approval for this business, that he had to comply with s.
4.10. Victoria and Downey is not a commercial area. He could have chosen to operate in acommercial zone and had a great deal more freedom to market and expand his business. But hischoice was to accept the restrictions applicable in a UR1 zone. He must comply with therestrictions even if they are an impediment to business growth.
The Remedy

[55] There is no dispute between the parties that the court has jurisdiction to enjoin theconduct of Mr. Dallard, whether in whole or in part.

[49] I am satisfied that the Town has established breaches to s. 4.10 of the By-law. Inparticular:

(a)

There is a serious issue to be tried;

(b)

It will suffer irreparable harm if an injunction is not granted; and

(c)

The balance of convenience favours granting the injuction.

[57] The “serious issue” threshold is not particularly high. Certainly, given my findings onthe issue of breach, one could not say that the Town’s case is frivolous. It passes the first hurdle.
Irreparable harm is generally assumed where the court is satisfied that the public authority (inthis case the Town) is charged with the duty of promoting the public interest and the By-lawcontravened was enacted pursuant to that responsibility. I am so satisfied in this case. Thesecond hurdle is passed.

[59] Finally, in cases involving the breach of public interest legislation – or in this case azoning by-law – the balance of convenience will almost always favour the public authority. Inthis instance, Mr. Dallard opened his business with the express understanding of the limitationsassociated with it. There is no challenge in this case to the validity of the By-law. Compliancewith it is, in my view, simple and not onerous. I find that the balance of convenience favours thegranting of injunctive relief. The third and final hurdle is passed.

[60] The Town wants me to essentially shut down Mr. Dallard’s business at its presentlocation. They say that it has outgrown the limits of a home-based business. My sense is thatthe Town may in fact regret approving the business in the first place.

[61] Having said that, the business was approved, and it appears to be a viable business. Inmy view the By-law infractions are relatively minor and easily resolved. They do not call for theultimate, extinction level, remedy sought by the Town. They do, however, demand compliance.

[62]

In the result, I order Mr. Dallard to do the following:
(1)

Forthwith bring the operation of What’s the Scoop into compliance with theTown’s Zoning By-law, specifically s. 4.10 thereof. Without limiting the generalityof the foregoing, he is to:
(a)

Remove all signage save for the two signs specifically approved by the Town;

[56] I intend to impose injunction relief today, but to otherwise keep the application alive, toensure compliance. The applicable test for interlocutory injunctive relief is as set out by theSupreme Court in RJR MacDonald Inc. v. Canada (Attorney-General) (1994), 111 D.L.R. (4th )
385. The applicant for injunctive relief must establish:

(2)

(b)

Remove all patio furniture accessible by patrons of the ice cream parlourincluding, again without limitation, any Muskoka chairs, any patio chairs andtables; and the pentagonal picnic table;

(c)

Fence off, or otherwise barricade, the entry into the expanded patio area at therear of his yard, to the east of the entry doors into the parlour; and,

(d)

Ensure that, with the exception of one employee, all employees are residentsof 5 Downey Avenue;

Pay the Town’s costs associated with this application fixed in the sum of $7,500
within 60 days.

[63] This is an application that was brought as a result of Mr. Dallard’s refusal to comply withthe By-law. The Town has been largely successful. They sought $10,000 in costs. I haveawarded a little less than what was sought given that they were not wholly successful on theapplication and because they are, to some limited extent at least, the authors of their ownmisfortune in this case. In my view, $7,500 is a fair, reasonable and proportionate sum for costsin the circumstances of this application.

[64] The application is otherwise adjourned sine die, returnable on 14 days’ notice in the eventof further compliance issues.

Boswell J.
Released: May 10, 2017

