CITATION: Nylene Canada Inc. v. Arnprior (Corporation of the Town), 2017 ONSC 3088
COURT FILE NO.: 14-62642
DATE: 2017/05/19

RE:

NYLENE CANADA INC. – Plaintiff/Respondents v. CORPORATON OF THE
TOWN OF ARNPRIOR – Defendant/Moving Party

BEFORE:

R. Smith J.

COUNSEL: Pasquale Santini, for the Plaintiff/RespondentsPaul A. Webber Q.C. and Mélanie H. Levesque, for the Defendant/Moving PartyHEARD:

By Written SubmissionsDECISION ON COSTS

[1]

The defendant/moving party (“defendant”) seeks costs of $43,723.27 on a substantial

indemnity basis or alternatively $32,792.43 on a partial indemnity basis for a summary judgmentmotion on which it was successful.

[2]

The plaintiff, responding party (“plaintiff”) submits that costs on a partial indemnity basis

closer to the amount of its costs outline, which was $9,840.00 should be awardedFactors

[3]

The factors to be considered when fixing costs are set out in Rule 57 of the

Rules of Civil Procedure and include in addition to success, the amount claimed and recovered,the complexity and importance of the matter and the principle of proportionality, the conduct ofany party which unduly lengthened the proceeding, whether any step was improper, vexatious orunnecessary, or taken through negligence mistake or excessive caution, a party’s denial orrefusal to admit anything, any offer to settle, the principle of indemnity, scale of costs, hourlyrate claimed in relation to the partial indemnity rate set out in the Information to the Profession

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

effective July 1, 2005, the time spent, and the

amount that a losing party would reasonably

expect to pay.

[4]

The defendant was successful on its motion and the matter was quite complex as it

involved the ability of a municipality to charge for waste water sources based on the amount ofwater supplied. Extensive materials were filed as evidence by the Town of Arnprior. The issuewas very important to the Town.
Reasonable Expectations of Unsuccessful Party

[5]

The plaintiff was not required to spend as much effort on the motion as the Town,

because it relied essentially on one decision of Kershman J. involving the Town of Prescott. TheTown was required to produce evidence of how it charged for waste water services including anengineering study and to show the reasonableness of it approach.

[6]

I find that it was reasonably expected that the Town would have spent more time on this

motion than the plaintiff in the circumstances and that the plaintiff’s bill of costs is not anappropriate comparator.
Scale of Costs

[7]

In the circumstances costs on a partial indemnity basis are appropriate.

Time Spent

[8]

The defendant’s senior counsel spent 15.6 hours and the junior counsel spent 246.9 hours.

While the issues were complicated the amount of time spent by junior counsel is beyond theamount of time that the losing party would reasonably expect to pay. The hourly rates arereasonable. As a result the amount of costs for preparation time will be reduced.

Success, Complexity and Importance

Disposition

[9]

Having considered the factors, the complexity and importance of the issue to the Town,

inclusive of HST.

Mr. Justice Robert J. SmithDate: May 19, 2017

the plaintiff is ordered to pay costs of $20,000 plus HST, plus disbursements of $195.88

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
RE:

NYLENE CANADA INC. –
Plaintiff/RespondentAND
CORPORATION OF THE TOWN OF
ARNPRIOR, Defendant/Moving Party

BEFORE:

R. Smith J.

COUNSEL: Pasquale Santini, for thePlaintiff/RespondentsPaul A. Webber Q.C. and Mélanie H.
Levesque, for the Defendant/MovingParty

DECISION ON COSTS

R. Smith J.
Released: May 19, 2017

CITATION: Nylene Canada Inc. v. Arnprior (Corporation of the Town), 2017 ONSC 3088
COURT FILE NO.: 14-62642
DATE: 2017/05/19

