SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO
RE:

Filomena Pace and Angelo Pace, PlaintiffsAND:
F & F Supermarkets Inc., Defendant

BEFORE:

Justice M.L. Edwards

COUNSEL: Mr. Richard C. Belsito, Q.C., Counsel for the PlaintiffsMr. Todd J. McCarthy, Counsel for the DefendantHEARD:

In-WritingCOSTS ENDORSEMENT

[1]

Counsel have requested that I deal with the question of costs that arise out of thePlaintiffs’ acceptance of the Defendants Offer to Settle dated May 17, 2016. The Offer toSettle provides in paragraphs 1 and 2 as follows:
1.

The Defendant shall pay to the Plaintiffs the sum of $50,000 for alldamages, inclusive of interest and inclusive of any OHIP subrogatedclaim;

2.

The Defendant shall pay the Plaintiffs their partial indemnity costs,HST and disbursements to the date of the Offer to Settle to be agreedupon or assessed
[Emphasis added]

[2]

I have received written submissions and a Bill of Costs from the Plaintiff, as well as aletter from defence counsel, Mr. McCarthy, setting forth his position with respect tocosts, which I will review in greater detail.

[3]

In coming to the conclusion that I ultimately do, I note that the Offer to Settle providesfor an agreement of costs or that the costs will be “assessed”. In assessing costs, Rule58.06 applies. This is not a case where the Court is fixing costs in accordance with Rule57.01. While the factors in Rule 58.06 and Rule 57.01 are somewhat different, I am of

CITATION: Pace v. F & F Supermarkets Inc., 2017 ONSC 3108
COURT FILE NO.: CV-12-109796
DATE: 20170519

[4]

[5]

In Mr. Belsito’s initial Bill of Costs, he provided to me a breakdown of the costs for theentirety of the proceedings. Those costs total $54,190 plus HST, and disbursements ofapproximately $12,000. The total Bill of Costs asserted on behalf of the Plaintiff wasapproximately $73,000 inclusive of HST.

[6]

I requested Mr. Belsito to provide me with a breakdown of his costs up to the date of theoffer, and then subsequent to the date of the offer. In my view this is an importantdistinction given that the offer to settle, which was accepted, provides that the Defendantwould pay the Plaintiffs partial indemnity costs to the date of the Offer to Settle.

[7]

Mr. Belsito provided the breakdown establishing that prior to the acceptance of the offercosts had been incurred in the amount of approximately $31,000, and subsequent to thedate of the offer in the amount of approximately $23,000. I did not receive a breakdownwith respect to disbursements incurred prior to the offer versus subsequent to the offer.
The original Bill of Costs establishes that at least one disbursement, the medical report ofDr. Chang, may have been incurred subsequent to the date of the offer.

[8]

In Mr. McCarthy’s written submissions, it is suggested that the appropriate assessmentshould be in the amount of $25,000 all-inclusive. It is argued that the Plaintiffs shouldnot be entitled to any “costs holiday”, and specifically that the Plaintiffs should not beentitled to any costs incurred subsequent to the date of the offer. Mr. McCarthy relies ona decision of Nordheimer J. in Rosero v. Huang (1999) 44 O.R. (3d) 669. Mr. McCarthyalso argues that proportionality suggests that the Plaintiffs should not be entitled to thequantum of costs claimed in a situation where the offer was accepted in the amount of
$50,000.

[9]

In assessing the costs entitlement of the Plaintiffs to the date of the Offer to Settle, I in noway question the hours that were expended by Mr. Belsito and his staff. The total costsincurred, both pre and post-offer, however, in my view are somewhat disproportionate tothe ultimate result in this case, reflected in the Plaintiffs’ acceptance of $50,000.
Recognizing the principles that I must apply, reflected in Boucher, supra, as well as theprovisions of Rule 58.06, I am of the view that the appropriate costs for which theDefendant should be responsible are those costs incurred up to the date of the offer,which I am fixing in the amount of $22,500 plus HST. As for the disbursements, to beconsistent with this determination the disbursements that the Plaintiff should be entitledto are those disbursements incurred up to the date of the offer. As I do not have abreakdown of what those disbursements are, I leave it to counsel to resolve that issue. If

the view that the result that I ultimately come to would be the same result whether I wasfixing costs or assessing costs.

Justice M.L. EdwardsDate: May 19, 2017

they cannot resolve the issue, I should be provided with a list of the disbursements thatare in issue and I will resolve that issue by telephone conference call.

