CITATION: R. v. Lee, 2017 ONSC 3304
COURT FILE NO.: CR-14-00213
DATE: 20170531

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
– and –
YUK YUEN LEE, JING ZHANG HUANG, )
LUNG WAI CHAN and DAVID ZHENG
Defendants )

Carol Shirtliff-Hinds, for the Crown

Darren S. Sederoff for Mr. Lee, MartinKerbel, Q.C., for Mr. Huang

HEARD: January 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17,18, 19, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 30, 31, February 1,3, 2017

REASONS FOR SENTENCE
EDWARDS J.:
Introduction

[1] Mr. Lee and Mr. Huang were convicted by a jury of one count of production of cannabiscontrary to s. 7(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (“CDSA”), and one count oftrafficking in cannabis contrary to s. 5(2) of the CDSA. Subsequent to the jury verdict I
conducted a Gardiner hearing to determine the number of marijuana plants at the marijuanagrow operation located at 419 Attwell Drive, Toronto, Ontario (“Attwell”). The issue inrelation to the number of marijuana plants was relevant to the determination of whether ornot the aggravating circumstances set forth in s. 7(2)(b)(v) and (vi) of the CDSA wereengaged such that Mr. Lee and Mr. Huang faced a mandatory minimum jail term of threeyears, had it been determined that the number of marijuana plants involved was more than500.

[2] At the completion of the Gardiner hearing I released Reasons on April 19, 2017. In thoseReasons I determined that the Crown had not proven beyond a reasonable doubt the actualnumber of plants at Attwell, but did conclude in my Reasons as follows:
While I do not accept that the Crown has established the number of marijuanaplants, thereby allowing the Crown to rely on the mandatory minimum, I

ONTARIO

nonetheless accept the evidence of Detective MacIntosh for the purposes ofsentencing that Mr. Lee and Mr. Huang were involved in a substantialmarijuana grow operation. That finding, in my view, has been proven beyonda reasonable doubt based on all of the evidence, including the photographicevidence, all of which demonstrates that what was happening at Attwell was asubstantial marijuana grow operation. I leave it to counsel to make whatsubmissions they wish to make as to the level of involvement of Mr. Lee andMr. Huang in that grow operation.

[3]

As I indicated to counsel during oral submissions received with respect to thedetermination of the appropriate sentence, I would be sentencing both Mr. Lee and Mr.Huang on the basis of my finding that they had been involved in a substantial marijuanagrow operation. Of particular significance, however, is their level of involvement.

Position of the Crown

[4]

The Crown seeks a sentence as against Mr. Lee of four years, together with ancillaryorders under s. 109 and a DNA order. The Crown submits that there is no pre-trialcustody that should be taken into account in reducing the overall amount of time that Mr.Lee would have to serve. In her submissions, the Crown suggests that Mr. Lee was the
“mastermind” with respect to the marijuana grow operation at Attwell. In that regard, itwas suggested that he was the individual who paid the various workers who wereobserved by the police, and notes that in one period of surveillance Mr. Lee is shown inan altercation with Mr. Huang that, it is suggested, relates to the non-payment of Mr.Huang’s wages. Crown counsel suggests that Mr. Chan, a co-accused who was acquittedby the jury, confirmed that he had been hired by Mr. Lee as a worker at Attwell. TheCrown points to the fact that there was a hydro bypass at Attwell and that Mr. Lee wouldhave been responsible, as the mastermind, for that hydro bypass.

[5]

As against Mr. Huang, Crown counsel seeks a term of imprisonment for two yearstogether with an ancillary order under s. 109 and a DNA order.

[6]

Anticipating an argument that would be made on behalf of Mr. Lee and Mr. Huang thatthis Court should take judicial notice of the imminent changes coming that will governmarijuana, the Crown argues that this Court should not take such changes into account.
In that regard, I was referred to a decision of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, R. v.
Neary, 2017 SKCA 29, where at para. 44 Ottenbreit J.A. stated:
Mr. Neary also argues that his offences are less serious on the basis that thegovernment has proposed in the future to fulfill its election promise to makesimple possession of marijuana legal. He asks the Court to place less weight onthe principles of denunciation and deterrence mandated by the Act. Such anargument cannot succeed. This Court cannot give less effect to the existing lawbecause of the possibility or even the probability of a future law that has beenpromised but which is not law at the moment. This Court is bound to apply the

law as it stands at the present time and, in any event, the government has notproposed the decriminalization of trafficking in marijuana. [Emphasis added]

[7]

Mr. Lee was born in 1953. He has a high school education and is a permanent resident ofCanada. He is divorced and declared bankruptcy in 2010. He has a criminal record.

[8]

On behalf of Mr. Lee, it is suggested that the appropriate sentence is a suspendedsentence plus probation. In that regard, Mr. Sederoff argues that in relation to the chargesdealt with in the Ontario Court of Justice (“OCJ”) that resulted in a total sentence of fiveyears, Mr. Lee has been incarcerated for 1,642 days and that his parole eligibility datewas December 9, 2016. It is suggested that Mr. Lee would have been entitled to earlyrelease from the OCJ charges as of December 9, 2016, and therefore Mr. Lee has been incustody in relation to these charges for a period of five months and eight days, or a totalof 160 days for which he would be entitled to credit for one and a half days, resulting in atotal credit of 240 days in relation to the charges before this Court. It is also noted thatMr. Lee has been held in detention at the local jail in Lindsay where he would not havehad access to any of the programs or other benefits that would have been available to himhad he been serving his sentence in the penitentiary.

[9]

As to Mr. Lee’s role in the marijuana grow operation for which he has been convicted inthis Court, Mr. Sederoff notes that there is no evidence that Mr. Lee was involved in thetheft of any hydro; that he was not involved in any actual trafficking; that there was noevidence that Mr. Lee was connected to the lease at Attwell; nor did he have anyinvolvement with the landlord at Attwell. It is further noted that the evidence does notestablish that Mr. Lee was involved in any monetary transactions involving the rent atAttwell, and that fundamentally the Crown has not proven that Mr. Lee was themastermind of the marijuana grow operation and that the evidence establishes to thecontrary, that his only involvement was that of a “gardener”.

[10]

Mr. Huang is 63 years of age. He lives with family members and assists in providingdaycare-type supervision of the children. He is employed part-time at an aquarium-typestore where he looks after fish. He is divorced and has married someone who is presentlyliving in China, and hopes that his new wife will be sponsored and will join him shortly.
He has no prior criminal record. Mr. Huang had a number of jobs, which includeworking in a local health club as well as a presser for various cleaners. He has threechildren and immigrated to Canada in 1993.

[11]

Mr. Kerbel suggests that the appropriate sentence for Mr. Huang would be a fine in theorder of $10,000 to $15,000 plus probation. Mr. Kerbel notes that Mr. Huang has beenon bail for four years, and that if a period of probation was attached to this Court’ssentence Mr. Huang would have been under judicial supervision for upwards of sevenyears. Mr. Huang was in pre-trial custody for six weeks.

Position of the Defence

[12]

Mr. Sederoff suggests that this Court should take into account the change in thelegislation that is presently contemplated by the Canadian government, which willfundamentally change the way this Court deals with marijuana related offences.
Essentially, Mr. Sederoff suggests that it would be inconsistent to impose the type ofpenitentiary sentence sought by the Crown when the Canadian government isdecriminalizing the simple possession of marijuana [my emphasis].

[13]

On behalf of Mr. Huang, Mr. Kerbel suggests that Mr. Huang performed a role at Attwellwhich was restricted to building tables upon which hydroponic marijuana plants could begrown, for which he was to be paid a salary. Mr. Kerbel notes that the last time Mr.Huang was seen at Attwell was in 2013, and that he was not seen again until he wasobserved by the police in a fight with Mr. Lee that, it is suggested, related to nonpayment of Mr. Huang’s salary. While Mr. Kerbel acknowledges that the police enteredthe Attwell premises in late 2013 and observed in excess of 3,000 marijuana plants, Mr.Kerbel argues, however, there is no evidence to confirm the number of marijuana plantsat Attwell in 2013 when Mr. Huang was last observed by the police.

[14]

Mr. Kerbel argues that Mr. Huang performed a role that would be akin to someone aidingand abetting the establishment of a marijuana grow operation, as opposed to someonewho was intimately involved in the marijuana grow operation. It is suggested that thereis no evidence that Mr. Huang was the mastermind, and that there is no evidence that hewas going to reap the type of profits suggested might have been available if the marijuanagrow operation had gone to market.

[15]

In terms of aggravating factors, Mr. Kerbel rightfully acknowledges that Mr. Huang wasinvolved in a commercial marijuana grow operation which is an appropriate aggravatingfactor for this Court to take into account. In terms of mitigating factors, Mr. Kerbelpoints to Mr. Huang’s age and the fact that he has no criminal record, which isaccompanied by a good work record. It is noted that he has never been supported by thestate on any form of welfare, unemployment insurance or disability. Mr. Kerbel notesthat Mr. Huang suffers from a number of health issues which include diabetes, urinaryfrequency, hypertension and prostrate problems.

[16]

Like Mr. Sederoff, Mr. Kerbel notes that this Court should take into account the changesthat are coming to the legislation as it relates to possession of marijuana. Mr. Kerbelsuggests that the government will now effectively become involved in licensing premisesmuch like the marijuana grow operation which was occurring at Attwell. Fundamentally,it is argued that the moral blameworthiness attached to marijuana is now being removedshould the new legislation come into effect.

Aggravating and Mitigating Factors

[17]

The most significant aggravating factor presented by the evidence in this case is the factthat the Attwell marijuana grow operation was substantial in nature and was clearlygeared to making substantial profits. If Mr. Lee and Mr. Huang were the directing mindsbehind the marijuana grow operation, the sentence to be imposed to give effect to the

[18]

While there has been significant debate in Canada as to whether marijuana has anyharmful health effects, a debate that now appears to be destined for significant legislativechanges, the fact still remains that the trafficking of drugs – which includes marijuana,occurs in a section of our society often associated with violence. In this case, I take intoaccount as a mitigating factor that neither Mr. Lee nor Mr. Huang appear to haveparticipated in any violent conduct associated with the charges before the Court, otherthan the one altercation that was observed by the police.

[19]

I also take into account as a mitigating factor the fact that the marijuana grow operationdid not take place in a residential area, nor is there any evidence of any destruction ofprivate property as is often seen in cases like this where the grow operation occurs in aprivate residence. While it is suggested by the Crown that Mr. Lee was involved in ahydro bypass, which would be an aggravating factor, I do not accept the suggestion thatthe evidence at trial establishes Mr. Lee’s involvement in such hydro bypass. In fact tothe contrary, Mr. Lee was charged with an offence in relation to a hydro bypass but hewas discharged at the preliminary hearing.

Analysis

[20]

The principles of sentencing are well known and are set forth in s. 718 of the CriminalCode (the “Code”). One of the principles, which in my view is most applicable to thefacts before this Court, is denunciation and deterrence. While there are fundamentalchanges that likely will be occurring as it relates to the use of and control of the sale ofmarijuana, the fact remains that the conduct in which Mr. Lee and Mr. Huang wereinvolved at Attwell was unlawful and will remain unlawful once the legislation presentlypending before Parliament becomes the law of this land. The activities at Attwelldemonstrated an involvement in a sophisticated commercial grow operation that wasdesigned for one purpose and one purpose only, that being to realize a substantial profit.

[21]

The Crown has the onus of establishing as an aggravating factor the involvement of Mr.Lee as a mastermind in the grow operation. I am not satisfied that the Crown has comeremotely close to satisfying that onus. There is no evidence that Mr. Lee was involved inthe lease at Attwell. There is no evidence that Mr. Lee paid the rent at Attwell. There isno evidence that Mr. Lee was involved with respect to the insurance at Attwell. There isno evidence that Mr. Lee had the financial wherewithal to pay for all of the hardwarelocated at the grow operation. The same comments can be made about Mr. Huang. Thereis no evidence that either Mr. Lee or Mr. Huang had the ability to bring the marijuana tomarket and thereby realize upon the substantial profits available for the sale of themarijuana.

principles of denunciation and deterrence would result in a substantial penitentiarysentence. In terms of Mr. Lee, a further significant aggravating factor is his priorcriminal record. Mr. Huang, on the other hand, comes before this Court to be sentencedfor the first time.

[22]

The evidence does establish that Mr. Lee may have been involved in hiring some of theworkers like Mr. Huang and Mr. Chan, but that evidence in my view does not establishMr. Lee’s role at the higher end of the hierarchy.

[23]

In my view another significant principle in imposing a sentence in this case isproportionality, as set forth in s. 718.1 of the Code which requires that the sentence mustbe proportionate to the “gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of theoffender” [emphasis added].

[24]

While the Attwell marijuana grow operation was a sophisticated commercial growoperation, I am not satisfied that either Mr. Lee or Mr. Huang were the mastermindsbehind the operation who would ultimately derive the substantial profits associated withsuch a grow operation. If the evidence had established such an involvement,proportionality and the principles of denunciation and deterrence would have warranted asubstantial penitentiary sentence. This is amply demonstrated in a decision of M.A. CodeJ. in R. v. Pham, 2016 ONSC 5312, where at para. 64 he analyzes the sentencing case lawas follows:
The sentencing case law dealing with large sophisticated commercialmarijuana grow-ops, like this one, stresses the fact that this particular kind ofcrime is rationally planned and premeditated. Significant amounts of time,money, preparation, and planning must have gone into the operation that wasset up in unit 1006 at 2755 Jane Street. This is the kind of criminal activity thatis particularly amenable to, and that requires, emphasis on the sentencingprinciples of denunciation and deterrence. In addition, the Court of Appeal hasrepeatedly stressed the "prevalence" of this offence, and the "serious risks"
associated with it, as relevant considerations. See: R. v. Tran (2005), 2005(CanLII); R. v. Nguyen, 2013 ONCA 51 (CanLII).

[25]

I was referred by counsel to a number of cases that supported the respective positionsasserted by the Crown and the defence. While the principles reflected in those decisionsare of assistance to the Court, the fact still remains that suggested ranges from earlier caselaw are guidelines which are there to assist trial judges in ultimately determining anappropriate, fit and just sentence. This is particularly so given that I am sentencing Mr.Lee and Mr. Huang, who in my view had fundamentally similar roles at the Attwell growoperation but whose circumstances are different, particularly in relation to Mr. Lee’scriminal record and Mr. Huang’s clean record.

[26]

When Mr. Lee and Mr. Huang became involved at the Attwell grow operation they musthave known that such involvement was criminal in nature. They may not have ultimatelyderived the substantial profits associated with a marijuana grow operation, butnonetheless their involvement was illegal. Such involvement was not only illegal then,but will continue to be illegal in the future even if the new changes to the marijuanalegislation are passed by Parliament. It may one day be legal to grow four marijuana

plants at one’s residence, but it will continue to be illegal to participate in an unlicensedmarijuana grow operation, like that at Attwell. Mr. Lee and Mr. Huang are to besentenced in accordance with the legislation as it existed when they were arrested. Thechanges in the marijuana legislation do not signal to me any fundamental change as itrelates to involvement of someone at a commercial marijuana grow operation like that atAttwell. Such conduct will continue to be criminal next year and into the future.

[27]

I was referred by the Crown to a decision of our Court of Appeal in R. v. Gobran, 2013
ONCA 407, which involved an accused who had plead guilty to two counts of productionof marijuana and three counts of possession for the purposes of trafficking in marijuana.
The accused was sentenced to five years concurrent on the production charges and fouryears concurrent for the trafficking charges. The accused had been involved in threesubstantial marijuana grow operations which contained respectively 2,079 plants, 1,312
plants and 2,700 plants. The sentencing judge found that the accused was the “operatingmind” behind the grow operations and that the street value was equal to something in therange of $1,600,000 to $2,500,000. On appeal, Pepall J.A. stated that it was open to thesentencing judge to conclude that “the Appellant’s involvement in the marijuana growoperations was that of an operating mind”. In upholding the sentence, Pepall J.A.
acknowledged that shorter terms of imprisonment have been imposed for similaroffences, but that the sentences rendered by the trial judge were not outside theacceptable range given the gravity and seriousness at issue.

[28]

I take from the comments of the Court of Appeal in Gobran, that a significant sentencingfactor in relation to marijuana grow operations relates to the status of the accused inrelation to the hierarchy of individuals that may be associated with a substantialmarijuana grow operation. The accused in Gobran was described as the operating mind.
In my view, neither Mr. Lee nor Mr. Huang remotely approach the level of the operatingmind in relation to the Attwell grow operation. It was open to the Crown to establishevidence that would allow this Court to conclude that Mr. Lee or Mr. Huang were theoperating minds. No such evidence is before this Court and I do not propose sentencingMr. Lee or Mr. Huang as individuals approaching the gravity and seriousness of thecrimes committed in Gobran.

[29]

The Court of Appeal in another decision relied upon by the Crown, R. v. Nguyen, [2007]
O.J. No. 3570, dealt with an accused who had been convicted of production of marijuana,possession of marijuana for the purposes of trafficking, simple possession and theft ofelectricity where the marijuana grow operation involved 1,121 plants and the theft ofhydro was in excess of $5,000. The Court of Appeal rejected the submission that aconditional sentence was an appropriate disposition on these facts and noted that themarijuana grow operation was “large scale”. In upholding the sentence of 15 months, theCourt of Appeal also took note of the fact that a conditional sentence was not anappropriate disposition given the propensity for marijuana grow operations in the localcommunity and the danger caused by a hydro bypass. The Court of Appeal also tooknote of the observations of various trial courts to the effect that there had been an increasein large scale marijuana grow operations with accompanying violence and threats ofviolence. None of the aforementioned evidence is before this Court. The marijuana grow

[30]

The Crown relies on another decision of the Court of Appeal in R. v. Chen, [2007] O.J.
No. 1153, where the Appellant had been convicted of production and possession ofmarijuana for the purposes of trafficking, as well as wilful damage to property. TheCourt of Appeal did not interfere with the trial judge’s sentence of 18 monthsimprisonment.

[31]

Finally, I was referred to the Court of Appeal decision in R. v. Lee, [2015] ONCA 850,where Mr. Lee, the same Mr. Lee who is presently before this Court, had received asentence of five years in relation to his conviction on two counts of production ofmarijuana and two counts of possession of marijuana for the purposes of trafficking. Inupholding the sentence of the trial judge, the Court of Appeal stated at para. 2:
…There was ample evidence to show that the appellant was not simply “adelivery guy” as he argues, but a significant participant in the two large andsophisticated marijuana grow operations.

[32]

The evidence upon which Mr. Lee was sentenced in the OCJ clearly established that Mr.Lee was something other than a low-level participant in the marijuana grow operations atissue. That evidence, however, is not before me and I cannot sentence Mr. Lee on thebasis of the evidence for which he was sentenced in the OCJ, a sentence which wasupheld in the Court of Appeal. I am sentencing Mr. Lee and Mr. Huang on the basis ofthe evidence established at trial. In that regard, as I concluded in my Reasons on theGardiner hearing I would be sentencing Mr. Lee and Mr. Huang on the basis of theirinvolvement in a substantial marijuana grow operation, subject to the submissions ofcounsel with respect to their respective levels of involvement in that grow operation. AsI have already made clear, I do not accept the Crown’s submissions that it has beenestablished that either one of Mr. Lee or Mr. Huang were the operating mind or directingmind of the Attwell location.

[33]

In arriving at an appropriate sentence for Mr. Lee and Mr. Huang, I have come to theconclusion that while neither of these individuals were the operating mind behind theAttwell location. Mr. Lee appears to have played a more active role given that he wasinvolved in at least the hiring of some of the individuals working at the Attwell location.
Mr. Huang on the other hand was only observed on one occasion and appears to haveperformed the role of a carpenter at best. I have also taken into account that Mr. Lee doeshave a criminal record, while Mr. Huang does not. The criminal record of Mr. Lee that I
have taken into account does not include the five year sentence that he is presentlyserving, which was upheld by the Court of Appeal.

[34]

As it relates to Mr. Lee, it is the sentence of this Court that Mr. Lee shall be incarceratedfor a period of 15 months. Upon the completion of his sentence Mr. Lee shall be on

operation was not in a residential area, and to the contrary appears to have been in acommercial area on the outskirts of Toronto. There was also no evidence of any threatsof violence other than the one incident involving two of the accused that was observedduring the course of police surveillance.

[35]

As it relates to the question of pre-trial custody, I do not accept the submission made byMr. Sederoff that Mr. Lee should be entitled to credit for the time period that he has beenserving since he would have been eligible for parole as of December 9, 2016. There is noevidence before this Court that Mr. Lee would in fact have received parole as of that date.
It is pure speculation to suggest that Mr. Lee would have received parole eligibility onDecember 9, 2016, and that any time spent in custody since then should be attributed tothese charges. I therefore do not credit Mr. Lee with any time for which he has beenincarcerated since December 9, 2016. If there is any time that Mr. Lee was incarceratedpending the disposition of the charges presently before this Court, then furthersubmissions can be made on his behalf.

[36]

As against Mr. Huang, it is the sentence of this Court that Mr. Huang shall beincarcerated for a period of seven months and one week, which after credit for pre-trialcustody of six weeks on a 1.5 basis leaves a net sentence of five months to be served.
Upon the completion of his sentence Mr. Huang shall be on probation for three years,subject to the same conditions as Mr. Lee as set forth in para. 35 above. Even though Mr.Huang may only have participated at a low level of the hierarchy of a marijuana growoperation, the fact still remains that he was involved in a substantial marijuana growoperation. This is not an appropriate case for the imposition of a fine or a suspendedsentence. Mr. Huang shall also be subject to a s. 109 order and a DNA order.

Justice M.L. EdwardsReleased: May 31, 2017

NOTE: As noted in court, on the record, this written decision is to be considered the officialversion and takes precedent over the oral decision read into the record. If any discrepanciesbetween the oral and written versions, it is the official written decision that is to be reliedupon.

probation for three years, the terms of which shall include the statutory conditions setforth in s. 732.1(2)(a)-(c) inclusive and s. 732.1(3) (a) (i) and (ii), (b)-(d) inclusive. Anancillary order under s. 109 of the Code and a DNA order shall also be imposed.

CITATION: R. v. Lee, 2017 ONSC 3304

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
– and –
YUK YUEN LEE, JING ZHANG HUANG, LUNG
WAI CHAN and DAVID ZHENG
Defendants

REASONS FOR SENTENCE
Justice M.L. EdwardsReleased: May 31, 2017

ONTARIO

