ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
– and –
ANNA FONTANA

Defendant )

Phyllis Castiglione, for the Crown

Stefano Fortini, for the Defendant

HEARD: February 27 and March 21, 2017

REVISED REASONS FOR SENTENCE
The text of the original decision has been corrected with the text of the corrigendum
(released today’s date)
EDWARDS J.:
Introduction

[1]

After a trial, Anna Fontana (“Fontana”), was found guilty of fraud over $5,000 and theft byconversion. The facts of this case are set forth in my Reasons for Decision released onJanuary 16, 2017. The essence of the fraud arises out of a loan (“The Loan”) made by Mrs.Edda Marie Favretto-Post (“Edda”) in the amount of $150,000 to Fontana. The loan wasintended to be used to establish a restaurant.

[2]

As I found in my Reasons, while Fontana may have had honest intentions when sheinitially accepted the loan, she very quickly chose to use the loan proceeds for personalpurposes as well as for gambling. Out of the $150,000 only $12,000 was repaid. No furtherpayments were made by Fontana since the early part of 2011. A statement of restitutionwas filed as Exhibit 3 which establishes that Edda seeks restitution in the amount of
$150,000, which is comprised of the outstanding principle of $138,000 plus interest, plus
“pain and suffering”. Even if the Court was to infer a nominal rate of interest of 3%, it isnot difficult to see how interest would exceed the $150,000 reflected in the statement ofrestitution.

CITATION: R. v. Fontana, 2017 ONSC 2964
COURT FILE NO.: CR-12-00007701
DATE: 20170516
CORRIGENDA: 20170524

[3]

As reflected in my Reasons for Decision Fontana and Edda developed a friendship, as aresult of which Edda agreed to lend Fontana the money which she needed to set up arestaurant. The loan of $150,000 was evidenced by way of a promissory note signed byFontana. The loan was interest-free for the first year and was repayable in five years.

[4]

As reflected in my Reasons, the loan was made for the sole purposes of establishing arestaurant. While I found that Fontana had honest intentions in her aspirations to set up arestaurant when she initially accepted the loan proceeds, she quickly changed course andused the funds for personal purposes as well as gambling.

[5]

As I stated at paragraph 38 of my Reasons:
…When Fontana failed in her efforts to set up a restaurant and began usingthe money for personal purposes, she did so dishonestly. To use the words ofthe Supreme Court in Zlatic, the ordinary individual would have littledifficulty concluding that Fontana’s actions were dishonest.
Her initialactions may have been honest; but they became dishonest very soon after sheaccepted the money and she became frustrated in her efforts to set up arestaurant.

[6]

According to the Victim Impact Statement filed as Exhibit 2, Edda is 76 years of age andthe loss of the $150,000 has had a significant impact on Edda’s life. I quote twoparagraphs from the Victim Impact Statement, which make clear that impact:
…My lifestyle has been dramatically and severely impacted. I can no longerenjoy wining and dining, no longer visiting art galleries and no longer beingable to attend and enjoy other artistic activities. Not to mention not havingthe ability to afford and enjoy any vacations in these “Golden Years”…I
asked myself how this person that I trusted could abuse that trust andfriendship. Did she ever think outside herself? I trusted you!

[7]

While the evidence at trial did not establish what in law would be considered a breach oftrust, the evidence nonetheless clearly established a breach of a friendship, a breach thatFontana took advantage of for her own personal benefit without any consideration forEdda.

Fontana’s Personal Circumstances

[8]

Fontana is 55 years of age and has been married for 36 years to Renato Fontana. Theyhave three adult children ranging in ages from 25 to 34 years of age.

[9]

Fontana completed grade nine and was last employed as a sales representative with a cardealership approximately nine years ago. Since then she has not been employed andpresently receives Ontario Disability Support Program (“ODSP”) of approximately $2,300
monthly, jointly with her husband.

Factual Background

[11] Part of the sentencing submissions was Exhibit 7, a medical report from Doctor Matta whohas been providing medical care to Fontana over the last 10 years. The report establishesthat Fontana has a number of medical problems, including chronic lumbar degenerativedisc disease, gall stones, Hepatitis C and depression. The Presentence Report establishesthat Fontana is presently taking methadone, which she has been using for physical pain dueto herniated discs. She has been taking methadone for the last nine years.

[12] Also filed, as Exhibit 9, was a report prepared by Doctor Brian Taylor who has beenproviding the methadone treatment to Fontana for the last four years. Doctor Taylor notesthat he has been treating Fontana for opioid dependency. Doctor Taylor, in his report,states:
In both medicine and law, we deal with human beings every day. I hope thatboth professions can recognize that poor personal choices are at the core ofmany medical and legal indiscretions. Although I am not privy to the exactdetails surrounding Mrs. Fontana’s legal case, I am uncertain of the purposeand need for incarceration of a grandmother, when perhaps less stringentpunishments can be effected…

[13] I take from Doctor Taylor’s aforementioned comments that Fontana did not provide all ofthe details that resulted in her conviction. The fact that Fontana chose not to provideDoctor Taylor with all of the details and the fact that Doctor Taylor does not appear tohave enquired into those exact details, detracts from Doctor Taylor’s uncertaintyconcerning the need for incarceration of a grandmother.

[14] Fontana is no stranger to the criminal law. She has prior convictions beginning in 1980 forusing a stolen credit card, uttering and possession of stolen property. This was followed bya conviction in 1982 for theft under $200, which was then followed with a conviction in1985 for false pretences under $200. Finally, there is a conviction in 1996 for fraud over
$5,000. The Crown acknowledges that the criminal record is dated and that there has beenno subsequent involvement with the criminal law since 1996.
Position of the Crown

[15] The Crown, while acknowledging that a conditional sentence is available on the facts ofthis case, takes the position that a conditional sentence is not appropriate and that thisCourt should impose a sentence of three years. It is noted by the Crown that no effortshave been made since Fontana’s arrest to make any restitution to Edda.

[16] While the Crown acknowledges that the circumstances of the fraud did not involve a legalbreach of trust, it was nonetheless a breach of a friendship which was based on trust.

[10] There is no suggestion in the evidence that Fontana committed the fraud as a result of anydependence on illicit drugs or alcohol. It was suggested during the sentencing submissionsthat she was “addicted” to gambling. While the evidence establishes that Fontana did use asubstantial part of the loan proceeds for gambling, I do not have expert evidence thatconfirms she had a gambling “addiction”.

[17] The Crown emphasizes denunciation and deterrence as the primary factors warranting aperiod of imprisonment. As for the aggravating factors, the Crown notes Fontana’s priorcriminal record and the fact that she has made no restitution. It is further noted that thefraud was perpetrated on a vulnerable victim, and relies on s. 718.2(a)(iii.1) which allowsthe Court to increase a sentence where there is evidence that the offence had a significantimpact on the victim, considering the victim’s age and other personal circumstancesincluding the victim’s health and financial situation. The Victim Impact Statement filed byEdda leaves little doubt with respect to the impact on Edda’s health and financial situation.

[18] As for mitigating factors the Crown suggests that there are few to none, and notes thatthere was no guilty plea and no restitution. As for remorse, the Crown referred the Courtto that part of the Presentence Report where Fontana expressed, to the author of the Report,remorse for her actions and an expression that she would repay the monies if she had themeans to do so. Her expressions of remorse needs to be viewed in the context of furthercomments made to the author of the Presentence Report, where the following is noted:
Mrs. Fontana stated that she feels extremely guilty for her actions and did notwant to bring about any distress and or hurt towards this elderly victim.
However, both her and her husband stated that they feel that the “moneycame to her and she did not go looking for it”.

[19] In addition to a period of incarceration of three years the Crown seeks a restitution order inthe amount of $150,000, as well as a fine in lieu of forfeiture in the amount of $138,000
with three years to pay.
Position of the Defence

[20] Counsel for Fontana argues that the appropriate sentence is an 18 month conditionalsentence with a lengthy period of probation. As for restitution, it was initially suggestedthat Fontana could pay restitution at the rate of $500 per month. I adjourned the sentencinghearing to allow Fontana to put further evidence before the Court with respect to her abilityto pay a restitution order.

[21] In that regard, further evidence was provided to the Court which establishes that Mr. andMrs. Fontana live in a residence which is registered in Mr. Fontana’s name and isappraised by the Municipal Property Assessment Corporation (“MPAC”) in the amount of
$583,000.
Mr. Fortini suggested that the real estate comparables in the Fontananeighbourhood ranged in value between $400,000 and $617,000. I was advised that theFontana residence is subject to a first mortgage of approximately $296,000 and a secondmortgage of $90,000. Assuming the Fontana residence had an appraised value asestablished by the MPAC Assessment, there is approximately $190,000 in equity in theFontana residence.

[22] In addition to the mortgages on title, Mr. Fontana has a line of credit of $14,000. There arecredit card debts totalling approximately $21,000.

[24] The Fontana residence was transferred from Mrs. Fontana’s name into her husband’s nameon September 20, 2010. Edda’s loan to Fontana, as evidenced in her cheque, Exhibit 1, isdated September 27, 2010. The promissory note evidencing the loan is dated September28, 2010.

[25] In relation to the timing of the loan with the transfer of title from Fontana to her husband, itis entirely suspicious given that both transactions occurred within a week of each other.
Fontana declared bankruptcy, and in her statement of affairs filed with the trustee inbankruptcy she did not initially disclose the residence which she had transferred to herhusband. Subsequent to the filing of her statement of affairs the trustee in bankruptcy didbecome aware of the transfer of title and in the report of the trustee, filed as Exhibit 11 attrial, the trustee in bankruptcy noted:
The bankrupt (Mrs. Fontana) transferred property (the family residence) to anon-arms-length party three years before the assignment at a time when shewas solvent. This was a requirement of the mortgagee at the time.

[26] Mr. John Morgan, the trustee in bankruptcy, testified at trial. In relation to the transferredtitle between Mr. and Mrs. Fontana, Mr. Morgan testified that when the transfer took placethere was no debtor creditor relationship between Mrs. Fontana and Edda. Mr. Morganalso testified that the transfer of title was due to a requirement of the mortgagee, i.e. thebank. Other than Mr. Morgan’s evidence, I heard no evidence from a bank representativeconfirming that the bank required title to be transferred from Mrs. Fontana to Mr. Fontana.
Given that Fontana’s income is higher than her husband’s, it is very difficult to conceive ofa situation why a bank holding a first mortgage would require title be transferred from theFontana’s name alone to her husband’s name alone.
Mitigating and Aggravating Factors

[27] There are few, if any, mitigating factors that this Court should take into account indetermining the appropriate sentence. Fontana elected, as was her right, to plead notguilty. The fact that Fontana did not plead guilty is not an aggravating factor.

[28] To this point in time there has been no restitution. At the sentencing hearing, after theCourt’s request for further information concerning Fontana’s financial affairs, I wasadvised by Mr. Fortini that Fontana’s children were prepared to assist in making somerestitution. Fontana’s children should be commended for stepping up to the plate to assisttheir mother in that regard. Unfortunately, the amounts that have been offered to assist inmaking restitution would still leave Edda substantially out-of-pocket as far as her lifesavings are concerned. What I did not hear from Fontana was any willingness to considerthe sale of the family residence as a means to make restitution.

[29] As for the aggravating factors the obvious one relates to the breach of Fontana’s friendshipwith Edda, which while not amounting to a true legal breach of trust nonetheless was a

[23] Fontana receives ODSP on a monthly basis in the amount of $1,579. Mr. Fontana has CPP
income of $687 per month. The combined family income is therefore $2,266.00.

breach of a friendship, that in my view is an aggravating factor that this Court should takeinto account in imposing sentence on Fontana (see R. v. Garrick, 2014 ONCA 747 at para.
24). I also take into account Edda’s circumstances, which include her health and financialsituation together with her age, such that in my view s. 718.2(a)(iii.1) is a relevantaggravating factor that this Court should take into account in imposing an appropriatesentence.
Analysis

[30] One of the objectives of sentencing set forth in s. 718 of the Criminal Code (the “Code”) isto provide reparations for harm done to a victim. In this case the victim of the fraud wasan elderly lady who has been deprived of a substantial part of her life savings, which hashad a significant impact on her both from a health perspective and a financial perspective.
To the extent the purposes and principles of sentencing can be properly applied to Fontana,it is this Court’s intention to see that proper reparations are made to Edda for the harm thatbefell her as a result of her friendship with Fontana.

[31] The principles of deterrence and denunciation are, generally speaking, fundamental to thesentencing process in cases involving fraud of the magnitude found in this case,particularly where the fraud involves a breach of friendship bordering on a breach of trust.
This principle is amply demonstrated by the facts of R. v. Taylor, 2012 ONCA 809, whereRosenberg J.A. upheld a sentence of 21 months. The accused had defrauded an elderlylady of $126,000. Refusing to interfere with the trial judge’s sentence, Rosenberg J.A.
stated at para. 36:
On the other hand, this was a serious offence. The appellant voluntarilyplaced herself in a position of trust in relation to the complainant. Shebecame her attorney and the executor of her estate. The frail, elderlycomplainant was completely reliant on the appellant. This was not a one-timeact but a planned and deliberate fraud committed over many months bysomeone whom the complainant looked upon as a friend. The appellant stoleand then spent over $126,000, almost the complainant’s entire life savings. Insuch a case, the paramount objectives of sentencing must be deterrence anddenunciation, and they cannot be adequately met by a conditional sentence.

[32] The fundamental principles of sentencing are well known and are set forth in s. 718 of theCode. In imposing an appropriate sentence the following objectives must be considered:
1. Denunciation of unlawful conduct;2. Deterrence of the offender;3. Separation of the offender from society where necessary;4. Rehabilitation of the offender;5. Providing reparation for the harm done to the victim; and

[33] In this case, while the nature of the fraud involving an elderly victim should generallyattract a jail sentence, the Court must still consider another objective set forth in s. 718, thatbeing the provision of reparation to the victim. On the facts of this case the otherobjectives of specific deterrence and rehabilitation of the offender are, in my view, of lessconcern given Fontana’s age and the support of the family that she has behind her.

[34] In considering the objective of reparation to the victim, the framing of an appropriateconditional sentence is another aspect of how this Court may develop an appropriatesentence for Fontana. Before doing so, I ask the fundamental question of whether aconditional sentence is available and whether it is appropriate. In that regard the Crownproperly conceded that a conditional sentence is available, albeit not one that the Crownconsiders is appropriate. Pursuant to s. 742.1 of the Code, Fontana was not convicted of anoffence where she faces a minimum term of imprisonment, nor are any of the preconditionsin paragraphs (c) through (f) inclusive applicable. As such, this Court can consider theimposition of a conditional sentence if I am satisfied that the service of Fontana’s sentencein the community would not endanger the safety of the community, and that it would beconsistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentence set forth in s. 718 to s.
718.2 of the Code.

[35] I have no evidence that would suggest allowing Fontana to serve her sentence in thecommunity would in any way endanger the safety of the community. I am equallysatisfied that specific deterrence is not a significant factor given Fontana’s age – thisdespite the fact there is evidence from Fontana’s criminal record of a predispositiontowards fraudulent conduct. While jail may be considered the appropriate sentence thatreflects denunciation and deterrence, a properly crafted conditional sentence may also giveeffect to the same principles.

[36] A sentence of true house arrest, while not the same as a jail sentence, will also imposesignificant restrictions on an offender’s liberty. In this case an appropriate jail sentence,reflected in the authorities to which I was referred by counsel, is anywhere from 18 monthsto 3 years depending on the various mitigating and aggravating factors present. Whetherthe sentence is served in a penitentiary or a provincial jail is a very close call, but I amsatisfied that in this case a sentence of two years less a day is not inappropriate and thus aconditional sentence is available for the Court’s consideration.

[37] Recognizing that one of the objectives of sentencing in this case is to provide reparation toEdda, the sentence I intend to impose reflects that objective. Fontana shall serve aconditional sentence of two years less a day, the terms of which are as follows:
1.

You shall keep the peace and be of good behaviour;

2.

You shall appear before the Court when required to do so by the Court;

6. Promoting a sense of responsibility in the offender and acknowledgment of theharm done to the victim.

3.

You shall report within three working days from today, in person to a supervisor,and thereafter report to the supervisor as required;

4.

You shall remain within the Province of Ontario unless your supervisor provideswritten permission to leave the province or the Court provides permission;

5.

You shall notify your supervisor of any change of address;

6.

For the first nine months of your sentence you shall be confined to yourresidence under house arrest for twenty-four hours per day, seven days week.
You may only leave your residence during those nine months for the followingpurposes:
a. to attend scheduled medical appointments or for a medical emergency;b. to shop for the necessities of life on Saturdays between the hours of twelvenoon and 5:00 p.m.;c. to attend a church or other religious institution once per week for no morethan two and a half hours; andd. travelling to and from any of the aforementioned activities set forth inparagraphs a through c above.
For the balance of your sentence you shall be confined to your residence betweenthe hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.;

7.

You shall abstain from owning or possessing, or carrying any weapon;

8.

You are to allow law enforcement officials, including the supervisor ordesignate, to knock at the door of your residence at any time between 6:00 a.m.
and 12:00 midnight of any day, for the purposes of ensuring your compliancewith the house arrest conditions of this Order. Your failure to present yourself atthe door to the supervisor or designate within five minutes will be considered abreach of this condition;

9.

You are to have no contact with Edda Marie Favretto-Post, except throughcounsel for the purposes of making restitution;

10. After the completion of the conditional sentence there shall be a period ofprobation for three years, on the statutory terms. You shall pay a fine in lieu offorfeiture on the terms set forth below;11. You shall make payment of the restitution order in the sum of $150,000, infavour of Edda Marie Favretto-Post, on the terms more specifically set forthbelow.

[39] Fontana may suggest that such an imposition is impossible as she has no means to repayEdda. I disagree. While her monthly income is limited, she has a possessory interest in thefamily residence. There is no evidence that her relationship with her husband is anythingother than one which is a loving, long-lasting relationship that has generated three adultloving and caring children. Edda was deprived of much of her life savings, the loss ofwhich has had a significant impact on her both emotionally and financially. I see no reasonwhy Fontana should not be forced into a situation where she may have to sell her familyresidence. This is particularly so, given the representation made by Fontana to Edda at thetime when the loan was being considered that she had more than adequate equity in herhome to make good on the loan.

[40] In making the order that I do, I recognize that the Court cannot force a sale of the familyresidence as title is presently in the name of Mr. Fontana. If title to the residence had notbeen transferred by Fontana seven days prior to the making of the loan, Edda could havesued Fontana and recovered her loan through the civil courts. These charges may neverhave made their way through the criminal courts if that transfer of title had never takenplace.

[41] But those are not the facts. Fontana transferred title under what can only be described ashighly suspicious circumstances. Fontana now has a choice. She either will, with theassistance and cooperation of her husband and family make full restitution to Edda withinnine months of today’s date, or she faces the possibility of serving the remainder of hersentence in jail.

[42] In addition to the restitution order that I have made, I have considered the Crown’sargument that this Court should also impose a fine in lieu of forfeiture in the amount of
$150,000, with 3 years to repay the fine. The restitution order that I have imposed is madepursuant to s. 738(1)(a) of the Code and forms part of the sentence. The broad objective ofthis restitution order reflects what is discussed in R. v. Zelensky, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 940 specifically the objectives of emphasizing the sanction on Fontana, making Fontanaresponsible for compensating Edda’s loss, and providing a convenient, rapid andinexpensive means of recovery for Edda. I also note the comments of the Court of Appealin R. v. Eizenga, 2011 ONCA 113, at para. 110 where Weiler J.A. stated that “a restitutionorder, which survives bankruptcy, is the only realistic way in which the victim will recoveranything.”

[43] While a restitution order is part of the sentence imposed on an offender, a fine in lieu offorfeiture is not punishment being imposed on the offender - see R. v. Khatchatourov, 2014
ONCA 464 at paras. 55-56. As noted by Watt J.A. in R. v. Angelis, 2016 ONCA 675 atpara. 51, since the imposition of a fine in lieu of forfeiture is not part of the global sentenceimposed on an offender it is not to be consolidated with sentencing on a totality approach.

[38] During the period of the conditional sentence Fontana shall make monthly restitutionpayments of $500, to be paid to Edda. More fundamentally, during the period of the ninemonths house arrest Fontana shall, by the completion of the nine months, have repaid thefull amount of the outstanding restitution order.

[44] This is not a case where the Court seeks to deprive Fontana of the proceeds of her crime.
On all accounts the proceeds of the loan have long since been dissipated - hence Fontana’sbankruptcy. Parliament has however enacted s. 462.37(3) of the Code which provides ameans for the sentencing Court to impose a fine in lieu of forfeiture. This section uses theword “may” as opposed to the word “shall” which is found in s. 462.37 (1). I thereforehave a discretion as to whether to impose a fine in lieu of forfeiture. The first questionhowever is whether subsection 3 even applies to the facts of this case. In my view they do.
A fine in lieu of forfeiture is appropriate where the property - in this case the loan - hasbeen rendered worthless or where the loan proceeds have been commingled with otherproperty that cannot be divided without difficulty. Fontana’s banking records make it quiteapparent that at least some part of the loan proceeds was used for the purpose of defrayingpersonal expenses of Mr. and Mrs. Fontana. There is no evidence Mr. Fontana was awareof the loan or how it was used, but he must have been blind not to have asked the obviousquestion of where Fontana obtained the money to purchase a BMW.

[45] Fontana’s counsel opposes a fine in lieu of forfeiture, in part on the basis that the evidenceis relatively clear she does not have an ability to pay a fine of $150,000. In essence, it issuggested that to impose a fine will be to set her up for a possible period of imprisonment.
Ability to pay is, however, not to to be considered by the sentencing court in decidingwhether to impose a fine in lieu of forfeiture, nor is it a factor in determining the amount ofthe fine. Rather, an offender’s ability to pay a fine is a factor to be considered indetermining the time within which the fine is to be paid – see R. v. Lavigne, 2006 SCC 10
at para. 52. An offender who does not pay a fine in lieu of forfeiture does not face anautomatic period of incarceration. Canada does not have a debtor’s prison. Rather, asnoted in Lavigne, supra, at para. 47, when the time allowed for payment of the fine hasexpired the Court asked to issue a warrant of committal “may not do so unless it is satisfiedthat the offender has, without lawful excuse, refused to pay the fine”.

[46] On the facts of this case it is, in my view, entirely appropriate to impose a fine in lieu offorfeiture in the amount of $150,000. The amount of that fine shall be reduced on a dollarfor dollar basis as restitution is made by Fontana to Edda. Under normal circumstances theCourt would consider it appropriate to consider a fairly generous period within which toallow the fine to be paid. In this case, as I have imposed a requirement that Fontana makefull restitution within nine months or face the possibility of serving the remainder of hersentence in jail, I am of the view that the appropriate time period for Fontana to have paidthe fine is at the completion of her sentence. Thus, if Fontana has not made restitutionwithin two years, Fontana may face a further period of incarceration that ranges betweenno less than two years and no more than three years – see s. 462.37 (4)(a)(v).

[47] In summary, it is the sentence of this Court that Fontana shall serve a conditional sentenceof two years less a day, the terms of which are as set forth in paragraph 37 above. A
restitution order shall also issue pursuant to s. 738 of the Code in the amount of $150,000,which restitution shall be made to Edda Marie Favretto-Post.

[48] As well, Fontana shall pay a fine in lieu of forfeiture in the amount of $150,000 within twoyears from today’s date. At the completion of your sentence you shall be on probation for

Justice M.L. EdwardsReleased: May 24, 2017

NOTE: As noted in court, on the record, this written decision is to be considered the officialversion and takes precedent over any oral reasons read into the record. If any discrepanciesbetween the oral and written versions, it is the official written decision that is to be reliedupon.

three years, the terms of which incorporate the statutory terms set forth in para.
732.1(2)(a)-(c) and s. 732.1(3)(a)-(c) inclusive of the Code.

CORRIGENDA
1. Paragraph [1] – the text of the original Decision has been corrected to substitute the words
“fraud by conversion” to “theft by conversion” at the end of the first sentence and beginningof the second sentence.

CITATION: R. v. Fontana, 2017 ONSC 2964

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
– and –
ANNA FONTANA
REASONS FOR SENTENCE
Justice M.L. EdwardsReleased: May 24, 2017

ONTARIO

