CITATION: R. v. Carvalho, 2017 ONSC 2906

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B E T W E E N:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN

- and -

GERRI CARVALHO

) Damien R. Frost
) Brendan Gould
) HEARD: March 13, 2017

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Justice Joseph M. Fragomeni

[1]

The accused, Gerri Carvalho, is charged with four counts as follows:
1. Simple possession of ecstasy.
2. Simple possession of cocaine.
3. Possession of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking.

COURT FILE NO.: 16-1675
DATE: 20170526

-2-

[2]

The trial of this matter took place on March 13, 2017 and it was blended

with Carvalho’s Charter Application pursuant to Sections 8, 9 and 24(2).
Trial/Application Evidence: (Trial)
Cst. Gillian Martin

[3]

Cst. Martin is a member of the Peel Regional Police. She was on duty on

March 26, 2015. Exhibit 1 at the trial is the Google map depicting the location ofwhere the events she describes took place.

[4]

Cst. Martin was in a marked police cruiser and she was alone. She was

parked facing north and she marked with a circle where in the apartmentcomplex her cruiser was parked. She was parked at this location for about 10
minutes when just after 11:53 a.m. she observed a silver Chevy Malibu travelfrom Kings Cross Road at a high rate of speed.

[5]

The Malibu drove right by her and turned in front of her. The Malibu made

a left turn and then made a quick right turn. It pulled forward and then backedinto a parking spot by 3 Knightsbridge Road. Cst. Martin depicted the route of

4. Simple possession of heroin.
The counts relate to a stop and seizure that took place on March 26, 2015.

-3-

with a red line.

[6]

Cst. Martin estimated the speed of the Malibu at 60 to 70 km/hour. Most

people travelling in that area of the apartment complex would travel at 15 to 20
km/hour.

[7]

As a result of these observations Cst. Martin had safety concerns as it

related to pedestrians within the complex.

[8]

As the Malibu passed her cruiser she had no idea how many people were

in the vehicle. She decided that it was necessary to speak to the driver so sheturned her cruiser around and caught the Malibu as it was reversing into itsparking spot.

[9]

At this point Cst. Martin radioed her traffic spot as a safety precaution. She

radioed her location and the licence plate of the Malibu. She parked her cruiserdirectly in front of the Malibu.

[10]

Cst. Martin observed three people in the vehicle. They looked nervous

and were fidgeting. She radioed for another police cruiser to attend the scene.

[11]

Cst. Martin exited her cruiser and approached the driver’s side. The doors

were open and all three male occupants were trying to get out of the vehicle. She

travel of the Malibu from Kings Cross Road to the parking spot. This is depicted

-4-

driver the other two males were sitting on the sidewalk.

[12]

Cst. Martin observed a scale on the back seat. She saw marijuana shake

on the scale and on the centre console. She identified the driver as the accusedbefore the court. Mr. Hill was the backseat passenger and Mr. Campbell was thefront seat passenger.

[13]

Cst. Martin had noticed a dent and discolouration on the front driver’s

side bumper and she was talking to the driver about that. It was not a large orserious dent.

[14]

As Cst. Martin walked toward the driver’s door she could smell fresh

marijuana. All three became hostile towards her, talking loudly all at once andsaying that she was harassing them. She had initially told them to stay in thevehicle but they ignored her.

[15]

Cst. Martin was aware that this area attracted lots of calls for violence

and drug dealing and this also factored in to her safety concerns. Cst. Martin wasa Neighbourbood Police Officer as well.

[16]

Cst. Martin’s plan was to arrest all three males but was waiting for the

other officers to arrive first. She was trying to keep the situation calm. Cst.

detected a pungent distinct odour of marijuana. As she was speaking to the

-5-

then she smelled the fresh marijuana and saw the scale and marijuana shake.

[17]

PC Kelly and PC Rozek arrived on scene in their cruisers. She told them

all three males were arrestable for drugs. She arrested the driver, Carvalho.

[18]

Cst. Martin conducted a search of Carvalho incident to arrest. She

located and seized the following items:
−

money

−

2 bags in his front right pocket containing 4 MDMA pills

−

white powder, less than 1 gram.

[19]

Carvalho was placed in the rear of the cruiser. He had no identification on

him. Cst. Martin took the keys from him as well. Carvalho was provided with hisrights to counsel and cautioned.

[20]

Cst. Martin took the keys and opened the driver’s side door. She was

going to search for the accused’s identification.

[21]

She opened the driver’s side door and noticed the black scale on the

back seat. She opened the centre console and saw a green electronic scale, 2 ½
inches by 2 ½ inches in diameter. She also saw a black wallet in the centre

Martin’s initial plan was to simply speak to them about the dangerous driving but

-6-

year old child, a paper licence in the name of Gerri Carvalho with no photo.

[22]

On the passenger side in the glove box she located a grocery bag tied

around a golf ball-like item that looked like a solid rock of cocaine.

[23]

Filed as Exhibit 2 is the bag found in the glove box. Also found in the

glove compartment were the following: Van and Truck Rental Agreement in thename of Paul Bonnick; a black, no stink bag; a clear plastic bag with tissue paperand a 1 inch dime bag containing white power (less than 1 gram), another bagtied tightly with a rock substance she believed to be crack cocaine.

[24]

Cst. Martin did not seize the scales. Cst. White continued the search after

she searched the glove compartment. Cst. White was the Exhibits Officer andCst. Martin gave him all the items she had collected from Carvalho and thevehicle.
Cross-examination

[25]

At no time did she seize or move the black scale that she observed on

the backseat. At no time did Cst. Martin seize the marijuana shake. She did seizethe green scale and gave it to Cst. White.

[26]

Cst. Martin did not take photos of the shake.

console, a Permanent Residence Card in Carvalho’s name, a photo of a 7 or 8

-7-

Cst. Martin described the smell of marijuana as a very strong, pungent

smell. At the preliminary hearing she stated the smell was strong – it was “kickingme in the face.”

[28]

With respect to the speed of the vehicle at the preliminary hearing she

said it was 50 to 60 km/hour. The 60 to 70 km/hour speed is a guess. She did notissue a speeding ticket. At the time she made a note that the vehicle wastravelling at a very high rate of speed.

[29]

The centre console had two portions. The green scale was in the top

portion and the wallet was in the bottom portion.

[30]

Cst. Martin confirmed that the smell was fresh marijuana, not burnt

marijuana.

[31]

Cst. Martin confirmed that the only reason she went to speak to the driver

was the high rate of speed. She could not give him a Highway Traffic Actspeeding ticket as he was on private property but he was driving dangerouslyand she had a right to speak to the driver. He was driving at a higher rate ofspeed than anyone else in the complex.

[27]

-8-

[32]

Cst. Rezek is also a member of the Peel Regional Police. On March 26,

2015 he responded to a radio call from Cst. Martin. He arrived at her locationwithin 45 seconds to 1 minute. He arrived on scene at 11:55 a.m. Cst. Martinadvised him the males were arrestable for drug possession. He dealt with GavinCampbell and put Gavin in his cruiser. Cst. Rezek did not search the vehicle orlook inside. Cst. Rezek could smell freshly burnt marijuana on Gavin Campbell.
He searched Gavin Campbell. At 3:45 Gavin Campbell was released on apromise to appear.
Cross-examination

[33]

Cst.

Rezek confirmed that what he smelled coming off of Gavin

Campbell’s jacket was freshly burnt marijuana.

[34]

He is sure of that smell as he has experienced it before while at Ontario

Police College in 2008 during control burns. He has smelled this 20 times overthe 2 years when he was on bike patrol.
Cst. Kenneth White

[35]

Cst. White is also a member of the Peel Regional Police. On March 26,

2015 he and Cst. Rezek responded to a radio call from Cst. Martin and

Cst. Robert Rezek

-9-

him to assist with the search of the vehicle. Cst. White did so and located thefollowing:
− front passenger side in the door handle – small white baggie with atwist
− centre console – black and grey cell phone; baggie with two baggiesinside with 8-ball symbols;
− on the floor by the front passenger seat was a black scale with writingon it – Exhibit 3 at this trial
− backseat – two sets of gloves and two balaclava.

[36]

Cst. White could smell fresh marijuana.

[37]

Cst. White was the Exhibits officer. He received Exhibit 4, the green

scale, from Cst. Martin. Cst. White also dealt with the drugs.

[38]

Exhibit 5 – the weight of the cannabis was 2.1 grams and it was analyzed

as cannabis. The cocaine was analyzed and it had a weight of 29.35 gm. Thegrey plastic bag with a knot was cocaine and weighed .7 grams. (Exhibit 6) Thegrey plastic knitted bag containing .85 grams of cocaine is Exhibit 7. Exhibit 8
contains the 4 MDMA ecstasy pills. Exhibit 9 is the heroin with a weight of 1.0
gram.
Cross-examination

responded to same within one to four minutes. At the scene Cst. Martin asked

- 10 -

Cst. White confirmed that he found the black scale on the front passenger

side floor. He could not recall seeing grocery bags in the vehicle. With respect tothe centre console he only checked the deeper portion of it. Cst. White does notrecall seeing any marijuana shake and made no note of that. If he had seen it hewould have noted it.
Defence EvidenceGerri Carvalho (Carvalho)

[40]

Carvalho is 22 years of age and lives in Toronto. On March 25, 2015 he

had been partying with friends at 5 Kings Cross Road. He was with GavinCampbell and Niyo Hill, Paul Bonnick and a few girls he had just met.

[41]

Carvalho drives a blue Acura and he drove to the party with Campbell

and Hill. Campbell had told Carvalho about the party.

[42]

Carvalho is employed at a Pizza Hut as a cook, full-time, and earns on

average $700 to $800 per week. The $200 cash seized from him was cash hehad on him that he brought to the party.

[43]

At the party Carvalho was drinking alcohol and smoking marijuana. He

had 3 to 4 joints with a few of his friends. They partied until the next day.
Campbell, Hill and Carvalho were all smoking marijuana together.

[39]

- 11 -

Carvalho also did a few lines of cocaine he had purchased from Hill. He

paid $30 for the cocaine (½ gram), the 4 MDMA pills were in his pocket.

[45]

The next day, March 26, 2015 they were hungry so they drove to

FreshCo for groceries. Carvalho took Paul Bonnick’s rental vehicle instead of hisAcura. Carvalho’s car had a fake insurance slip so Bonnick offered to allow himto take the rental and Carvalho drove. Carvalho was concerned about policepresence at the Kings Cross Road area and knows there is a frequent policepresence in that area. He has seen police in the area more than half of the timeshe has been there.

[46]

Carvalho, Hill and Campbell attended at FreshCo. While Carvalho was

paying he gave Campbell the keys and he and Hill returned to the vehicle.

[47]

After they left FreshCo Carvalho testified that he was driving cautiously.

He was only a G1 licenced driver, he was aware of police presence in the area,and he had drugs in his pocket from the party.

[48]

Once they returned to the complex and parked he noticed a police cruiser

right behind him. They were blocked in. They all immediately got out of thevehicle and closed the doors and started walking to 5 Kings Cross Road.

[44]

- 12 -

Cst. Martin got out of her cruiser and told them to stop. Campbell asked

why and she said, “I’m investigating this dent on the rental vehicle.”

[50]

They were all placed under arrest. All of the groceries were left in the

vehicle, except one bag, which he had on him.

[51]

Carvalho had placed his wallet in the centre console.

[52]

The speed he was travelling at the complex was 30 to 40 km/hour.

[53]

Carvalho recognized the following trial Exhibits:
Exhibit 8 the baggie with the MDMA pills. He does notrecognize the other bag.
Exhibit 6 He recognizes it as the baggie in his pocket withthe MDMA pills.
He does not recognize Exhibits 5, 7, or 9.

[54]

He had no idea that there were drugs in the glove box.

[55]

He did not see marijuana shake in the vehicle. He did not see either scale

in the vehicle.

[56]

When he threw his wallet in the centre console he did not look inside and

notice anything. He put it there not to have it in his back pocket.

[57]

He did not look or notice any damage to the vehicle.

[49]

- 13 -

He has met Bonnick prior to this day on 10 occasions. Bonnick is

Campbell’s girlfriend’s cousin.
Cross-examination

[59]

In cross-examination Carvalho acknowledged or confirmed the following:

−

he did not bring any drugs to the party

−

he has known Campbell for 7 years and Hill for 2 or 3 years

−

he has partied with Bonnick before. Bonnick uses cocaine, marijuana,and ecstasy.

−

he bought 5 MDMA pills and had taken one so he had 4 left in his pocket

−

he had no idea if Bonnick is a drug dealer

−

he did not know Bonnick’s vehicle was a rental

−

he cannot recall if he had his cell phone with him – neither of the two cellphones found in the vehicle are his

−

the no stink bag is not his

−

the two scales found are not his

−

exhibits 8 and 6 are the bags found in his pocket

−

at Exhibit 7, the grey bag is a different shade of grey

−

the travel route from Kings Cross Rd is not as described by Cst. Martin

−

he would not expect Bonnick to loan him his rental vehicle with 29 gramsof cocaine in it

−

the cocaine found in the glove compartment is not his.

Charter Issues:

[58]

- 14 -

[60]

The Defendant submits that Cst. Martin had no reasonable grounds to

stop the Defendant and as such the initial stop is arbitrary and contrary to s.9 ofthe Charter of Rights.

[61]

The Defendant submits that Cst. Martin blocked the vehicle driven by the

Defendant, with her own cruiser, and as such he was detained. The Defendantargues that there was no authority to stop the vehicle pursuant to the HighwayTraffic Act as he was travelling in a private parking lot.

[62]

The Defendant readily acknowledges, however, that if I accept Cst.

Martin’s evidence that she investigated the driver as a result of his dangerousdriving, (speed, location, public safety of those in the apartment complex), thenCst. Martin did have a common law duty to investigate. In those circumstanceshis s. 9 Application would fail.

[63]

The Defendant points to his own testimony that he was driving cautiously.

He asks the court to accept his evidence on that issue.

[64]

With respect to s.8 of the Charter of Rights, the Defendant submits that

Cst. Martin did not have reasonable and probable grounds to search him or thevehicle. The smell of freshly burnt marijuana is insufficient to establish those

Position of the Defendant

- 15 -

testimony that in addition to the strong smell of freshly burnt marijuana she saw ascale on the backseat and marijuana shake then his s. 8 Application would fail.

[65]

The Defendant submits, however, that Cst. Martin’s evidence relating to

the scale and the shake is not credible. Cst. White did not see any shake in thevehicle. Cst. White found a black scale on the floor of the front passenger seatand not on the back seat.

[66]

With respect to the smell, Cst. White said he could smell the marijuana at

the threshold of the vehicle. Cst. Rezek testified that he smelled burnt marijuanaon Campbell’s clothing.

[67]

Further, only 2 grams of marijuana were seized and it was packaged so

Cst. Martin’s evidence on that issue cannot be relied on.
Section 24(2)

[68]

The Defendant acknowledges that there is a diminished right to privacy in

a vehicle. The search of the Defendant’s person however, attracts a higherexpectation of privacy.

[69]

In applying the Grant factors, on balance, the evidence seized out to be

excluded.

grounds. Again the Defendant acknowledges that if I accept Cst. Martin’s

- 16 -

[70]

With respect to s.9, the Crown submits that there is no reason not to

accept the testimony of Cst. Martin. Cst. Martin had a common law duty toinvestigate what she perceived to be dangerous driving.

[71]

Cst. Martin made observations about the speed of the vehicle and

considering its location in the apartment complex was concerned for the safety ofthe public.

[72]

The Crown argues that the Defendant’s testimony with respect to his

cautious driving and route taken into the complex is not credible. If he had parkedwhere he said he did Cst. Martin would never have even seen him.

[73]

There is no reason not to accept Cst. Martin’s testimony with respect to

the initial stop.

[74]

With respect to s.8 of the Charter of Rights, the Crown submits that Cst.

Martin did have reasonable and probable grounds to arrest the Defendant and assuch both the vehicle search and the search of the Defendant were properlyundertaken as searches incidental to arrest.

[75]

The Crown submits that it is not necessary to resolve the inconsistencies

between Cst. Martin and Cst. White regarding the presence of shake and the

Position of the Crown

- 17 -

himself testified that he, Campbell and Hill had done a session prior at the partyand he agreed she would have smelled of burnt marijuana.

Section 24(2)

[76]

The Crown submits that if the court concludes that there were two

breaches, s.9 and s.8, then the evidence seized ought to be included. However,if the court finds that only s.8 was violated then the evidence should be admitted.
In applying the Grant factors to the evidence, on balance, the evidence should beadmitted.

[77]

Cst. Martin acted in good faith and even if she was mistaken with respect

to whether the marijuana smell was fresh or burnt she believed it was freshlyburnt marijuana.

[78]

The vehicle was a rental and in those circumstances the expectation of

privacy is significantly diminished.

[79]

The evidence seized is real evidence, it is not conscripted, and it is

necessary for the prosecution to proceed.

location of the black scale. With respect to the smell of marijuana, the Defendant

- 18 -

s. 9

[80]

I accept the testimony of Cst. Martin as it relates to her initial

observations of the vehicle being driven by the Defendant. I accept her evidencethat she observed the vehicle travel from Kings Cross Road at a high rate ofspeed. The vehicle drove right by her and turned in front of her. In her trialtestimony Cst. Martin estimated that the vehicle was travelling at 60 to 70
km/hour. At the preliminary hearing she estimated that the speed was 50 to 60
km/hour. This difference is of no moment and I accept her evidence that thevehicle was travelling at a very high rate of speed and at a higher rate thananyone else in the complex. She stated that most people travelling in that area ofthe apartment complex would travel 15 to 20 km/hour. Cst. Martin was concernedabout the safety of pedestrians within the complex.

[81]

This initial stop by Cst. Martin was not arbitrary. She had a common law

duty to investigate this matter further and she did so. I am satisfied that bothbranches of the Waterfield test were met, namely:
− the conduct of Cst. Martin fell within the general scope of any dutyimposed by statute or recognized at common law
− the conduct involved a justifiable use of powers associated with that duty.

Conclusion Re: Charter Issues

- 19 -

The

testimony

of

the

Defendant relating to this initial stop and

investigation cannot be accepted. The route of travel described by him and theultimate spot where he says he parked would have made it impossible for Cst.
Martin to even see the vehicle from where she was parked. I also do not accepthis evidence that he was driving cautiously for the reasons he articulated. Hisstated concern about police presence in the area is undermined by the fact thathe had on his person MDMA pills and a small amount of cocaine. If he hadconcerns about police presence it is reasonable to infer that he would have leftthose drugs in the apartment and not have them on his person.

[83]

In all of these circumstances the s.9 Application is dismissed.

S.8

[84]

The testimony of Cst. Martin and Cst. White differ with respect to two

matters. Cst. Martin saw a black scale on the back seat of the vehicle. Cst. Whitesaw a black scale on the floor by the front passenger seat.

[85]

Cst. Martin saw marijuana shake or crumbs. Cst. White did not recall

seeing any marijuana shake and made no note of seeing that. If he had seenmarijuana shake he would have made note of it.

[82]

- 20 -

I cannot resolve these two inconsistencies. One or both of the Officers

are mistaken with respect to these two areas. In those circumstances, I amunable to find that Cst. Martin could base her reasonable and probable groundsfor arrest on seeing a scale and marijuana shake. On that basis, therefore, Cst.
Martin could only rely on the fact that she smelled freshly burnt marijuanaemanating from the vehicle.

[87]

The Defendant argues that the smell of marijuana on its own is

insufficient to establish reasonable and probable grounds. In support of thatposition the Defendant relies on R. v. Polashek, 45 O.R. (3d) 434. In Polashekthe Court set out the following:
In short, the appellant argues that the presence in a vehicle of the odour ofmarijuana alone shows only that at some time someone smoked marijuana inthat vehicle. It does not provide reasonable grounds to believe that the presentoccupant of the vehicle was in present possession of marijuana. Thus, it isargued, there are no grounds for an arrest or a search based solely on theofficer's perception of marijuana odour.
I agree, in part, with the appellant's position. Had Constable Ross based hisarrest of the appellant solely on the presence of the odour I would have held thatthere were not reasonable and probable grounds to make the arrest. GivenConstable Ross' admission that he could not from the odour alone determinewhether the marijuana had been smoked recently or even if he was detecting thesmell of smoked marijuana, the presence of odour alone did not providereasonable grounds to believe that the occupant was committing an offence. Thesense of smell is highly subjective and to authorize an arrest solely on that basisputs an unreviewable discretion in the hands of the officer. By their nature, smellsare transitory, and thus largely incapable of objective verification. A smell willoften leave no trace. As Doherty J.A. observed in R. v. Simpson, at p. 202: ". . .
subjectively based assessments can too easily mask discriminatory conductbased on such irrelevant factors as the detainee's sex, colour, age, ethnic originor sexual orientation."

[86]

On the other hand, I would not go so far as was urged by the appellant that thepresence of the smell of marijuana can never provide the requisite reasonableand probable grounds for an arrest. The circumstances under which the olfactoryobservation was made will determine the matter. It may be that some officersthrough experience or training can convince the trial judge that they possesssufficient expertise that their opinion of present possession can be relied upon.
Even in this case, the Crown adduced sufficient evidence from which the trialjudge could reasonably conclude that Constable Ross accurately detected theodour of marijuana rather than some other substance.

[88]

Cst. Martin’s testimony regarding the smell is corroborated by both Cst.

White and Cst. Rezek and the Defendant himself.

[89]

Cst. Martin is quite clear and certain that as she approached the vehicle

she detected a pungent and distinct odour of marijuana.

[90]

In cross-examination she described the smell of marijuana as very strong,

pungent smell. At the preliminary hearing she stated that the smell was “kickingme in the face.”

[91]

Cst. Rezek stated he could smell freshly burnt marijuana coming off

Gavin Campbell’s jacket. Cst. White could also smell fresh marijuana. TheDefendant himself acknowledged that at the party that continued well into themorning he had smoked marijuana along with Campbell and Hill.

[92]

From my review of Cst. Martin’s evidence I am satisfied that her initial

plan was only to speak to the driver about the dangerous driving he exhibited in

- 21 -

- 22 -

observations, namely:
− The smell of freshly burnt marijuana
− The black scale noticed on the back seat
− The marijuana shake she observed in the vehicle.

[93]

As I indicated earlier, I am unable to resolve her evidence with that of Cst.

White and in those circumstances I cannot make a positive finding of fact relatingto the black scale and the marijuana shake. With only the smell of marijuana leftto anchor the Officer’s reasonable and probable grounds, I am not satisfied thatsufficient grounds existed. I am satisfied, guided by Polashek and on theevidentiary record I have that the Defendant’s s.8 rights were breached.
Section 24(2)

[94]

In R. v. Grant 2009 SCC 32 the Supreme Court of Canada set out the

factors that the court must consider in its s. 24(2) analysis. In Grant the Court setout the following at para. 71:
A review of the authorities suggests that whether the admission of evidenceobtained in breach of the Charter would bring the administration of justice intodisrepute engages three avenues of inquiry, each rooted in the public interestsengaged by s. 24(2), viewed in a long-term, forward-looking and societalperspective. When faced with an application for exclusion under s. 24(2), a courtmust assess and balance the effect of admitting the evidence on society’sconfidence in the justice system having regard to: (1) the seriousness of the

the apartment complex. That initial plan changed, she said, because of three

Charter-infringing state conduct (admission may send the message the justicesystem condones serious state misconduct), (2) the impact of the breach on theCharter-protected interests of the accused (admission may send the messagethat individual rights count for little), and (3) society’s interest in the adjudicationof the case on its merits. The court’s role on a s. 24(2) application is to balancethe assessments under each of these lines of inquiry to determine whether,considering all the circumstances, admission of the evidence would bring theadministration of justice into disrepute. These concerns, while not preciselytracking the categories of considerations set out in Collins, capture the factorsrelevant to the s. 24(2) determination as enunciated in Collins and subsequentjurisprudence.

Seriousness of the Breach

[95]

This factor favours admission. Cst. Martin acted in good faith and even

though she believed that with the strong smell of marijuana that was sufficient toground her belief any mistake on her part does not rise to a level of seriousnessthat points to exclusion.
Impact on the Charter-Protected Interests of the Accused

[96]

This factor points to admission. The Defendants’ reasonable expectation

of privacy in this rental vehicle was low. Further the search of the Defendant wasminimally intrusive.
Society’s interest in an Adjudication on the Merits

[97]

This factor favours admission. Without the drugs the Crown’s case is

gutted. The charges are serious. At para. 79 in Grant, the Court states:

- 23 -
(SCC), [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1199, at pp. 1219-20. Thus the Court suggested inCollins that a judge on a s. 24(2) application should consider not only thenegative impact of admission of the evidence on the repute of the administrationof justice, but the impact of failing to admit the evidence.

[98]

Finally at para. 86 in Grant the Court sets out the following:
In all cases, it is the task of the trial judge to weigh the various indications. Nooverarching rule governs how the balance is to be struck. Mathematical precisionis obviously not possible. However, the preceding analysis creates a decisiontree, albeit more flexible than the Stillman self-incrimination test. We believe thisto be required by the words of s. 24(2). We also take comfort in the fact thatpatterns emerge with respect to particular types of evidence. These patternsserve as guides to judges faced with s. 24(2) applications in future cases. In thisway, a measure of certainty is achieved. Where the trial judge has consideredthe proper factors, appellate courts should accord considerable deference to hisor her ultimate determination.

Conclusion

[99]

All of the evidence seized should be admitted into evidence.

Trial ProperPosition of the Crown:

[100]

The Crown submits that the Defendant had knowledge and control

of the drugs found in the vehicle. Carvalho, as the driver of the vehicle, hadcontrol of the vehicle.

- 24 -

- 25 -

The Crown argues that Carvalho is in control of a mobile stash

house. He has access to the glove compartment. His wallet was under the greenscale in the centre console. Carvalho stated that neither Campbell or Hill put thedrugs in the vehicle so the only inference is that it was Carvalho.
Position of the Defendant

[102]

The

Defendant

submits

that

the

Crown

has

not

established

possession of the drugs in the vehicle beyond a reasonable doubt. TheDefendant points to the following factors in support of that position:
− The vehicle being driven by Carvalho was a rental vehicle in the nameof Paul Bonnick
− There was no evidence called as to who owned the cell phones locatedin the vehicle
− Cst. Martin located his wallet and the scale separately
− The two cell phones are located in the centre console
− The packaging of the drugs found on Carvalho is different than thepackaging of the drugs found in the glove compartment
− The black scale was found on the floor on the front passenger side andCampbell was sitting in the front passenger seat

Analysis and Conclusion

[101]

- 26 -

In this case the Defendant testified and as such I instruct myself on

the W.D. analysis as follows:
(The W. (D.) Instruction)

[1]
If I believe Carvalho’s evidence that he did not commit the offence(s)
charged, I must find him not guilty.

[2]
If, after a careful consideration of all the evidence, I am unable to decidewhom to believe, I must find Carvalho not guilty (because Crown counsel wouldhave failed to prove Carvalho’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.

[3]
Even if I do not believe Carvalho’s evidence, if it leaves me with areasonable doubt about his guilt, I must find him not guilty.

[4]
Even if Carvalho’s evidence does not leave me with a reasonable doubtof his guilt, I may convict him only if the rest of the evidence that I do acceptproves his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.

[104]

As I indicated I accept the testimony of Cst. Martin regarding her

initial stop and the route of travel of the vehicle to its eventual parking spot. I donot accept the Defendant’s testimony in that regard.The testimony of theDefendant with respect to the drugs in the vehicle, however, leaves me with areasonable doubt. I agree with defence counsel that Carvalho did not minimizehis conduct with respect to his personal circumstances or the events at the party.
He acknowledged he had fake insurance. He acknowledged he consumedmarijuana, MDMA and cocaine at the party. His testimony with respect to hisknowledge of the drugs in the rented vehicle leaves me with a reasonable doubt.

[105]

The vehicle is rented to Paul Bonnick. The black scale is found on

the floor on the passenger side. I accept that Carvalho may have just thrown his

[103]

- 27 -

console. There is nothing to suggest Carvalho looked in the glove compartment.

[106]

In R. v. Griffin, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 42, the Court stated that in order to

find an accused guilty of an offence on the basis of circumstantial evidence, theCourt must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that his or her guilt is the onlyrational conclusion or inference that can be drawn from the whole of theevidence.
I am not satisfied that the Defendant’s guilt is the only rational c onclusion thatcan be reached on the evidentiary record before me. There is an evidentiary gapthat can only be filled with evidence not speculation or conjecture.

[107]

The Defendant does not have to prove who the drugs in the vehicle

belong to. He does not have to establish that Campbell, Hill, Bonnick or anyoneelse for that matter placed the drugs in the vehicle.
In all of the circumstances of this case I am satisfied that Carvalho is guilty withrespect to the drugs found on his person. I am not satisfied beyond a reasonabledoubt that the Crown has proven the counts on the Indictment relating to thedrugs found in the vehicle.
Disposition

wallet in the centre console without taking a look at what else was in the centre

[108]

Finding of guilty on Counts 1 and 2.

[109]

Finding of not guilty on Counts 3 and 4.

___________________________
Justice Joseph M. Fragomeni

Released:

May 26, 2017

- 28 -

CITATION: R. v. Carvalho, 2017 ONSC 2906

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B E T W E E N:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN

-

and –

GERRI CARVALHO

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

Fragomeni J.

Released:

May 26, 2017

COURT FILE NO.: 16-1675
DATE: 20170526

