CITATION: R. v. Filli, 2017 ONSC 2883
COURT FILE NO.: CR/15/70000/5940000
DATE: 20170510

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

BETWEEN:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN

- and -

OSAMA FILLI

Mr. G. Crisp and Mr. M. Giovinazzo, for theCrown

Mr. J. Norris and Ms. M. Conway, forMr. Filli.

HEARD: January 9, 10, 12, 16, 17, 18, 19,20, 23, 24, 25,27, 30, 31; February 2, 3, 6, 8,9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 28; March 2, 3, 6,7, 8, 9, 2017

M. FORESTELL J.
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
I

OVERVIEW

[1]
Osama Filli is charged with the second degree murder of Nahom Berhane. Hepleaded not guilty to this charge and the trial proceeded before me without a jury.

[2]
Mr. Berhane and Mr. Filli fought in the early morning hours of September 27,2014 outside a café on Danforth Avenue near Greenwood Avenue. Although they hadacquaintances in common, they had not met before the fight. In the fight, Mr. Filli stabbedMr. Berhane with a knife that Mr. Filli had bought about nine hours earlier. He inflicted twostab wounds.

[3]
Mr. Berhane’s death was caused by a massive hemothorax andhemopericardium as a result of one of the stab wounds that entered through Mr. Berhane’s

ONTARIO

-2-

[4]
Mr. Filli sustained a small cut on the lower palm of his right hand and a smallcut on the outer part of his left palm near his wrist.

[5]
Mr. Filli testified that he was outnumbered in a three-on-one fight withMr. Berhane, Maarg Abraha and Selim Ademnur when he stabbed Mr. Berhane. He stabbedhim because he feared that he would be killed or seriously harmed.

[6]
Maarg Abraha testified that Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane were fighting in a oneon-one fight when Mr. Berhane was stabbed. Mr. Abraha testified that he triedunsuccessfully to intervene and stop the fight.

[7]
The issues in this trial are whether the Crown has disproven self-defencebeyond a reasonable doubt and, if so, whether the Crown has proven that Mr. Filli had theintent for murder.

[8]
In these reasons I will first set out the evidence and my approach to theevidence. I will then set out the legal framework and, finally, my analysis and findings in thecontext of the legal framework.
II

EVIDENCE

Overview

[9]
The only witnesses to the actual stabbing of Mr. Berhane were Mr. Filli andSelim Ademnur. Mr. Maarg Abraha witnessed the fight that preceded the stabbing, but he didnot see Mr. Filli stab Mr. Berhane. Other witnesses saw fragments of the fight. Videosurveillance of the area does not capture the area of the fight, but shows the participantsarriving and leaving. Several witnesses testified as to the activities of Mr. Berhane, Mr. Filli,Mr. Abraha and Mr. Ademnur during the hours leading up to the fight, including theiralcohol consumption and level of intoxication.
Background

[10]
The background of the individuals involved, their relationships and theiractivities in the hours leading up to the fight are relevant to the assessment of the credibilityand reliability of the witnesses and to the assessment of the subjective belief and objectivereasonableness of the belief of Mr. Filli that he needed to defend himself. Many of thebackground facts are not in dispute.

[11]
Mr. Berhane was employed at a community organization called AccessAlliance. He was well known to many individuals in the Eritrean Canadian community. Hewas 34 years-old at the time of his death.

[12]
After work on the evening of September 26, 2014, Mr. Berhane attended ameeting of the alumni of a program known as “City Leaders” at Church Street and Wellesley

back and pierced his lung and heart. Another stab wound on Mr. Berhane’s back played norole in his death as it did not enter the body cavity. The two stab wounds were locatedapproximately in the middle of Mr. Berhane’s back, slightly to the left of the midline.

-3-

[13]
Mr. Berhane and Mr. Aklome met at Awash and then at 10:00 or 10:30 p.m.,went to view a nearby business premise that they were thinking about renting for a businessventure. The meeting went well and Mr. Berhane seemed to be in a good mood when hereturned to Awash with Mr. Aklome at around 11:00 p.m.

[14]
Mr. Berhane drank alcohol at Awash. The estimate of his blood alcohol levelat the time of death at 3:00 a.m. September 27, 2014 was 178 mg of alcohol in 100 ml ofblood. According to the toxicologist, Ms. Betty Chow, if Mr. Berhane began drinking at9:30 p.m. and died at 3:30 a.m., he likely consumed between 7½ to 9¼ standard drinksbetween those times. A standard drink is 12 fluid ounces of beer, 1.5 fluid ounces of distilledspirits or 5 ounces of wine. Mr. Berhane was seen to drink 1 or 2 beers that night as well asgin and tonic. The precise number of drinks that he consumed is unknown.

[15]
Evidence was led as to the usual drinking habits of Mr. Berhane. Witnesseswho knew Mr. Berhane testified that he seldom drank more than two beers. According to thefriends and acquaintances who testified, when he drank, Mr. Berhane’s personality andbehaviour did not change. The evidence concerning Mr. Berhane’s normal drinking patternwas not challenged.

[16]
Maarg Abraha is a Crown witness who was present for the fight that resultedin the death of Mr. Berhane. Mr. Abraha immigrated to Canada from Eritrea. When he cameto Canada, Mr. Abraha met Mr. Berhane because of Mr. Berhane’s work at Access Alliance.
Mr. Abraha testified that Mr. Berhane counseled him and was a mentor to him. Mr. Abrahafelt that Mr. Berhane was like a brother to him.

[17]
Mr. Abraha had seen Mr. Filli prior to September 26, 2014 but did not knowhim well or consider him to be a friend. He had seen Mr. Filli sweeping the sidewalk with acane about a week before September 26, 2014. As I will discuss in more detail below,Mr. Abraha drank in a park with Mr. Filli and others in the hours before the fight.
Mr. Abraha did not know Mr. Filli’s name when he first spoke to the police after thestabbing. Mr. Abraha made inquiries to find out Mr. Filli’s name after his first statement tothe police on the morning of September 27, 2014.

[18]
Mr. Abraha testified that he, at times, drank 13-14 beers on a weekend. Hesaid that the consumption of this amount of alcohol would make him want to “sing and chat”.
It would not make him intoxicated. He believed that he would need to drink about 20 beers tobe drunk.

[19]
Selim Ademnur also emigrated from Eritrea to Canada. Mr. Ademnur was afriend of Mr. Abraha and of Mr. Berhane. He knew Mr. Filli, having seen him in the area ofGreenwood and Danforth, but he was not a friend of Mr. Filli. Mr. Admenur had also seenMr. Filli a few days before the incident sweeping the ground with a cane. Mr. Ademnur waspresent at the fight and was one of the men drinking in the park with Mr. Filli, Mr. Abraha

Street. The meeting ended around 9:00 p.m. Mr. Berhane then met a friend, Henok Aklome,at a bar called Awash in the area of Greenwood and Danforth. Two doors from Awash was acafé called Lumar. Both Awash and Lumar were frequented by members of the EritreanCanadian community in Toronto. Awash served alcohol. Lumar did not serve alcohol.

-4-

[20]
On April 11, 2016, Det. Sgt. Carbone spoke with Mr. Ademnur via conferencecall. Mr. Ademnur advised the officer that he would be returning to Canada on June 20,2016. The officer provided Mr. Ademnur with his phone number and asked Mr. Ademnur tocontact him when he returned. Mr. Ademnur did not return at the time of trial. He did notmake contact with any member of the Toronto Police Service at any time before the end ofthe trial.

[21]
Mr. Ademnur gave three statements to the police on September 27, 2014.
Mr. Ademnur’s statements to the police were admitted into evidence for the truth of theircontents.

[22]
Nur Hussein worked as a manager of the Lumar Café on the night of the fight.
The fight occurred on the sidewalk outside that café. Mr. Hussein is also Eritrean andemigrated from Saudi Arabia. He knew Mr. Berhane and had seen him on the night ofSeptember 26, 2014, before the fight. Mr. Hussein also knew Mr. Filli. Mr. Filli is Eritreanand emigrated from Saudi Arabia. Mr. Hussein mentored or counseled Mr. Filli after he cameto Canada. Mr. Hussein saw and spoke to Mr. Filli on the night of September 26, 2014 beforethe fight. Mr. Hussein knew Mr. Abraha as someone who spent time around the area of theLumar Café. Mr. Hussein testified that he has a head injury that affects both his short termand long term memory. He testified as well that he has poor eyesight. In court Mr. Husseinhad difficulty seeing the Crown when he was 25 feet away. He said it was “a little blurry”.

[23]
Mr. Filli was born in Saudi Arabia to Eritrean parents. Mr. Filli came toCanada in December 2012. He was 22 years-old in September of 2014. In his statement tothe police after his arrest, Mr. Filli indicated that when he first came to Canada he lived withan aunt in Whitby. He moved from his Aunt’s home to an apartment on Pharmacy Avenue.
In April of 2014, he moved to a rented room around Eglinton and Keele. From that residencehe moved to a basement apartment that he shared with another Eritrean immigrant. Mr. Filliremained in the apartment for two months. In September he moved to a shelter. He spent twoweeks in one shelter and had been in a second shelter for two weeks before the fight onSeptember 27, 2014.

[24]
It is an admitted fact that a man named Abdulanes Yuanes knew Mr. Filli andhad known him for 16 months before September 27, 2014. Mr. Yuanes spoke to Mr. Filli inAugust 2014 about Mr. Filli’s trouble paying rent. In that meeting, Mr. Filli spoke toMr. Yuanes about needing a gun. Mr. Filli explained in his testimony that he askedMr. Yuanes about getting a gun in the context of being concerned about people entering hisresidence and taking his things. Mr. Yuanes saw Mr. Filli on September 21, 2014 in the areaof Danforth and Greenwood sweeping the sidewalk in the area around the Lumar Café.
Mr. Filli testified that he cleans up garbage from the streets. He carries gloves with him forthe purpose of picking up garbage.

and others before the fight. He gave statements to the police after the stabbing. He did nottestify at the preliminary inquiry or at the trial. Mr. Ademnur left Canada and returned toEritrea around the time that the police were attempting to serve him with a subpoena totestify at the preliminary inquiry.

[25]
On September 14, 2014, after Mr. Filli had moved to a shelter, two of hisacquaintances, including a man named Mahmoud Adderahman, took a knife away fromMr. Filli. Mr. Filli became upset when his knife was taken from him. He said that he neededa knife to protect himself because he believed that people wanted to harm him, that hewanted to protect people in the shelter, that he needed to walk with his knife and that he wasbeing hunted. In his testimony at trial, Mr. Filli said that he was upset when his knife wastaken from him. He explained that when he said he was being hunted, he was referring to thefact that he had been robbed and beaten up on the streets. He had also been forced intoperforming a sexual act in the washroom of a bar. He was upset with the individuals whotook his knife from him because they did not understand “the life that he was leading”.

[26]
Mr. Filli was prescribed Risperidone by a nurse practitioner, Duncan Eby, atAccess Alliance, on September 25, 2014. Mr. Filli reported to Mr. Eby that he had run out ofhis prescription for chlorpromazine two days earlier. He reported that he was takingchlorpromazine for stress and that he sometimes had “crazy ideas.”

[27]
Mr. Filli testified about his usual drinking pattern. Initially he said that itwould take 15-20 shots before he would be drunk. He later corrected this evidence and saidthat he could not go over 10 shots without being drunk. He testified that he would generallyorder two double shots at a bar.

[28]
With that general background, I will now turn to the evidence of the events ofSeptember 26 and 27, 2014 leading up to the confrontation between Mr. Filli andMr. Berhane.
Events of September 26-27, 2014 leading up to the fightOsama Filli

[29]
At 5:38 p.m. on September 26, 2014, Mr. Filli entered a Canadian Tire Storein downtown Toronto and purchased a large knife and a sheath. Mr. Filli left the CanadianTire store at 5:55 p.m. with the knife. Mr. Filli wore a “fanny pack” around his waist. Heattached the sheath with the knife to the belt of the fanny pack. His shirt covered the sheath.
Mr. Filli testified that he purchased the knife that day to replace the knife that had been takenfrom him. He could not replace it earlier because he did not have enough money. He receivedmoney from social assistance on September 25th and 26th, 2014.

[30]
By around 8:00 p.m. Mr. Filli was in the area of Greenwood and Danforth. Heattended at a hair salon where he had his hair braided. This took about one hour. After havinghis hair braided, he offered liquor to the hairstylist and went to find glasses. He did not returnto the hair salon.

[31]
Mr. Filli testified that at around 10:00 or 10:30 p.m. he went to a park in theDanforth and Greenwood area with Mr. Abraha, Mr. Ademnur, and three other menidentified as Temesgen, Emmanuel and Khalid. Mr. Abraha, Mr. Ademnur, Temesgen andEmmanuel were friends who had been together earlier. Khalid was a friend of Mr. Filli whoalso knew Mr. Abraha. Mr. Filli had a 26 ounce bottle of Jack Daniels in his backpack that hebrought to the park and shared with the others. Mr. Abraha had beer that Mr. Abraha drank inthe park. The others, except for Khalid, drank the liquor that Mr. Filli had brought. The men

-5-

remained in the park drinking until around 12:00 or 12:30 a.m. Mr. Filli estimated that he,Mr. Ademnur, Temesgen and Emmanuel had five or six shots each. Mr. Abraha was drinkingbeer. Khalid was not drinking. They all smoked marihuana. Mr. Filli said that he was pickingup garbage in the park. He had gloves with him that night and he testified that he may havebeen wearing them in the park to pick up the garbage. Temesgen, Emmanuel and Mr. Abrahawere speaking loudly. Mr. Filli was not comfortable and suggested leaving the park. He andthe others left the park. Khalid went home and the others went to Awash.

[32]
Mr. Filli testified that he did not stay long at Awash. He drank from a flask inthe washroom with Emmanuel, one of the men from the park. He stood for a short timeoutside the washroom, but the bar was crowded and Mr. Filli left. He went from Awash toLumar. The manager of Lumar, Mr. Hussein, testified that he saw Mr. Filli in Lumar and thathe spoke to Mr. Filli. Mr. Filli testified that he stayed at Lumar until after 2:00 a.m. He leftLumar and walked towards the subway sometime after 2:00 a.m. He found that the subwaywas not running. He returned to the area outside Lumar. He sat on a planter on the sidewalk.

[33]
Around this time, Mr. Filli testified that he saw Mr. Berhane speaking with agroup of young men outside the bar. Mr. Filli testified that Mr. Berhane appeared to be
“reproaching” or “blaming” the men for something. Mr. Filli could not hear what was beingsaid, but he testified that Mr. Berhane was shouting and that the other men were looking atthe ground.
Maarg Abraha

[34]
Mr. Abraha’s evidence did not differ significantly from that of Mr. Filli withrespect to the movements of the group prior to the fight. Mr. Abraha testified that he went tothe beer store and was on his way to the park with Mr. Ademnur, Emmanuel and Temesgenwhen they saw Mr. Filli and Khalid outside Lumar. They invited Khalid to come with themand Mr. Filli came as well. Mr. Abraha testified that he did not specifically invite Mr. Filli,but he had no problem with him coming along. They went to the park and drank. Mr. Abrahatestified that he had “6, 7, 8 or maybe 10” beers with him. He testified that he drank “6 or 7
or 8” beers in the park. He said that the others were drinking from Mr. Filli’s bottle and mayhave had 6-7 shots each. Mr. Abraha only had one shot from the bottle of liquor.

[35]
Mr. Abraha testified that at one point Mr. Filli took Temesgen’s telephone thatthey were using to listen to music. Temesgen appeared to want to fight Mr. Filli. Mr. Abrahagot in the middle of the two and got the phone back. At another point, Mr. Filli was standingbehind them on a table in the park and Mr. Abraha told him to stop. Mr. Filli beganmassaging Mr. Ademnur and Mr. Ademnur told him to stop. Mr. Filli then began circling thegroup. Mr. Filli was picking up garbage in the park. Mr. Abraha testified that Mr. Filli waswearing gloves on both hands. He was wearing a hat and sunglasses and was carrying a bag.

[36]
Mr. Abraha did not like the situation at the park and suggested leaving.
Mr. Abraha, Emmanuel, Mr. Ademnur and Temesgen walked to Awash. Before leaving,Mr. Abraha suggested to Khalid that he should take care of Mr. Filli. Mr. Abraha testifiedthat he thought that Mr. Filli was either drunk or mentally ill because of his behaviour. Heagreed that he did not want to be around Mr. Filli because of Mr. Filli’s odd behaviour. WhenMr. Abraha arrived at Awash with the others he saw Mr. Berhane in the bar. Later, he sawMr. Filli in the bar, standing near the washroom.

-6-

-7-

Mr. Abraha drank more beer at Awash. He did not know how many beers he

[38]
Over the course of the evening, Mr. Abraha went in and out of Awash tosmoke. He generally smoked outside Awash and the Lumar Café. His habit was to walk backand forth and chat with people outside.

[39]
Mr. Abraha remembered talking with Temesgen, Emmanuel, Mr. Ademnur,Mr. Berhane and a white man outside Awash on the evening of the fight. Mr. Berhane wasgiving advice to Temesgen. Mr. Abraha also testified that he saw Mr. Berhane counselling agroup of young men. Mr. Berhane, at some point, told Mr. Abraha to take care of Temesgen.

[40]
Mr. Abraha testified that he and Mr. Ademnur walked Temesgen to the busstop. He testified that Temesgen was younger and was drunk. Mr. Abraha felt it was theirresponsibility to ensure that he left the area and went home. Mr. Abraha said that after2:45 a.m. when the bar closes is a bad time around the bar and he felt that he had to be sure toget Temesgen on the bus.

[41]
After walking Temesgen to the bus, Mr. Abraha walked back towards Lumarand Awash with Mr. Ademnur. Mr. Abraha described seeing the fight between Mr. Filli andMr. Berhane begin after he returned from the bus stop.
Selim Ademnur

[42]
In his statements, Mr. Ademnur also described the events before the fight. Hisaccount was essentially the same as that of Mr. Filli and Mr. Abraha. Mr. Ademnur said thaton the evening of September 26, 2014 Mr. Ademnur was with Mr. Abraha on the Danforth.
They got beer. Mr. Filli had liquor. Mr. Filli came with them to the park. Mr. Filli gave themsome liquor and they gave Mr. Filli some beer. At the park Mr. Filli started “acting up”. Theywere all drunk. Mr. Ademnur said that Mr. Filli had a glove on one hand. Mr. Ademnur andhis friends went to Awash. Mr. Filli came with them but they separated from him.
Mr. Ademnur and Mr. Abraha left Awash and went outside. He took a friend to the bus stopsometime around 3:00 a.m. Mr. Ademnur described speaking to Mr. Berhane outside Awashand telling him that he was going to smoke. He described seeing Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhanebegin fighting after he left to smoke a cigarette.
Henok Aklome

[43]
Henok Aklome described seeing Mr. Berhane in Awash, handing glasses tothe server after Awash stopped serving alcohol. This was likely after 2:15 a.m. Mr. Berhanewent outside sometime later. He left his jacket over the back of his chair. His friendsassumed that he had gone out for air and was coming back.
Nur Hussein

[44]
Mr. Hussein was working at Lumar on the night of the fight. He received acomplaint from a young man about Mr. Filli. The man told Mr. Hussein that Mr. Filli had aQuran in his possession and had taken it into a bar (Awash). Mr. Hussein spoke to Mr. Filliabout this and Mr. Filli told Mr. Hussein that he would not do that again. Mr. Filli then leftthe café. When Mr. Hussein spoke to Mr. Filli, he did not notice any signs of intoxication.

[37]
consumed.

-8-

[45]
Although the accounts of the events leading up to the fight are fairlyconsistent between the witnesses, Maarg Abraha and Selim Ademnur gave an account of thefight that differed fundamentally from the account given by Mr. Filli. The other witnessesobserved only parts of the fight. I will review the accounts given by Mr. Abraha,Mr. Ademnur and Mr. Filli with reference to the evidence of the other witnesses whotestified that they saw some part of the events.
Maarg Abraha

[46]
Mr. Abraha testified that when he got back to the area outside the Lumar Café,he saw Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane sitting on a planter on the sidewalk outside the restaurant.
The two were talking. Mr. Abraha heard Mr. Berhane say, “I am not afraid.” Mr. Filli said,
“You’re not afraid? You’re not afraid?” repeatedly. Mr. Abraha approached the two men andsaid to Mr. Berhane, “[l]et’s go.” Mr. Berhane replied, “You –you go to your home.”
Mr. Abraha said to Mr. Berhane, “[i]f I am to go home, you should go as well.”

[47]
Both Mr. Berhane and Mr. Filli got up off the planter. Mr. Abraha stoodbetween them. He held them apart and tried to calm them. The two men pushed him out ofthe way and started fighting. They hit each other. They fought against a car that was parkedby the curb. While they were fighting, Mr. Filli was just off the sidewalk on the street andMr. Berhane was on the sidewalk. After he was pushed aside, Mr. Abraha pulled back to lookfor help.

[48]
At one point during cross-examination, Mr. Abraha, in describing the fight,said that Mr. Ademnur, “was behind me because I told him to stand there…because he maynot be able to…get involved to just break up the fight. And the way Nahom did everythingfor us, supporting us, I did not want to get any further trouble for Nahom.” Later in histestimony, he agreed that Mr. Ademnur may have been standing next to him during the fight.

[49]
Within seconds, Mr. Berhane was bent over and appeared to be hurt.
Mr. Berhane took two to three steps and started falling. Mr. Abraha went to catch him.
Mr. Abraha fell to his knees holding Mr. Berhane.

[50]
After Mr. Berhane fell, Mr. Abraha grabbed Mr. Filli’s hand and asked,
“[w]hat did you do?” Mr. Abraha believed that this occurred out on the street. Around thattime, he heard Mr. Hussein’s voice. He thought he heard Mr. Hussein say “[s]top”.

[51]
Mr. Abraha testified that after the fight ended he saw the blood on his clothesand was shocked. He told a bystander to call 911. He did not have a phone. He then left andwalked eastbound. He reached the corner and saw a friend, Yoel Ghabracristos. Mr. Abrahaasked Yoel to give him his clothes. Mr. Abraha took off his shirt and pants and put on theshirt and pants of his friend Yoel. He asked Yoel to keep his clothes for him. Mr. Abrahathen returned to where Mr. Berhane was lying on the sidewalk. Mr. Abraha spoke to thepolice when they arrived at the scene. By 3:52 a.m. he told the police about changing hisclothes.

The Fight

-9-

[53]
Although in his testimony Mr. Abraha denied that he changed his clothesbecause he was concerned that he would be blamed in some way for what had occurred, inhis statement to the police on September 27, 2014 Mr. Abraha said, “[i]s this serious? Likeblood on my clothes and shit. And now I know, you know. I would fight, I would fight, butlike I know I’m going to go to jail, you know. Like I didn’t care….”. Mr. Abraha testifiedthat what he meant was that he knew that in Canada if you got into fights you would be heldin custody and that he would not get into fights like that.

[54]
It was put to Mr. Abraha that there were two stages to the altercation: aninitial argument between Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane at which time he took Mr. Berhane awayfrom the area, followed by Mr. Berhane returning to the area to engage in a physical fight.
Mr. Abraha denied this suggestion. He was taken to the notes of P.C. Perk, the officer whospoke to Mr. Abraha on the scene. The notes indicated:
Abraha advised saw suspect and victim fighting onstreet/sidewalk. He stepped between the two. Victim andsuspect got into verbal. Abraha took victim away but victimwent back to suspect. Abraha didn’t see stabbing. Suspect ranand victim fell to the ground, saw blood and realized victimhad been stabbed.

[55]
Mr. Abraha agreed that he had seen Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane fighting on thesidewalk near the street. He agreed that he stepped between them but said that he did sobefore the fight. He agreed that Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane yelled at each other. Mr. Abrahaalso agreed that he attempted to convince Mr. Berhane to leave with him and go back toAwash. He denied that he physically took Mr. Berhane away. He denied that Mr. Berhaneleft Mr. Filli and then returned. Mr. Abraha suggested that his English was not good and thatthere must have been confusion about what he said to the officer.
Selim Ademnur

[56]
Mr. Ademnur, in his statement, said that he went outside to smoke withMr. Abraha and “was chilling there”. He saw Mr. Filli outside. He saw Mr. Berhane standingwith Mr. Filli. Mr. Ademnur said,There was three of us. I went there to Nahom, I said like,
‘Nahom, I’m gonna smoke.’ When I left, as soon as I –I lookback, they had started they fight. I’m like, ‘Hey, whathappened?’ I –I try to reach them, you know?...to push themaway, the guy had like a – I can’t even see, took the gun—theknife and stabbed him. Like what, I grab his arm…I grab likethis like ‘hey, what are you doing?’ …I told him like you cango to jail for that. He said like ‘yo, move, move.’

[52]
Yoel Ghabracristos testified that Mr. Abraha told him to take the clothes. Yoeltook them with him in a taxi. On the way, he saw that the clothes were soaked in blood. Hegot out of the taxi at a gas station and threw the clothes in the garbage. He testified that hedid not want to bring the clothes home.

[57]
At a later point in the statement, Mr. Ademnur said that when he andMr. Abraha went outside, Mr. Filli was sitting on a planter. Mr. Berhane was sitting on thesame planter “after that”. He saw Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane start arguing. He was not closeto them when the argument started. He was also very drunk. He remembered hearing wordslike “yo, let’s fight.” Mr. Ademnur went back towards the two men. Mr. Abraha was thereand was saying “yo, guys, chill out, chill out.” They continued to say words like, “I wannafight, I wanna fight.” They started to fight and Mr. Filli took out the knife and stabbedMr. Berhane. Mr. Ademnur did not see where the knife came from but believed it was from apocket. He saw Mr. Filli stab Mr. Berhane in an overhand motion. He only saw Mr. Filli stabMr. Berhane once. Mr. Ademnur said that Mr. Berhane did not get in any punches. After thestabbing, Mr. Ademnur grabbed Mr. Filli’s hand and asked what he was doing. Mr. Filli toldhim to move and he let him go. Mr. Filli ran westbound in the street.

[58]
incident.

Mr. Ademnur said repeatedly that he was “too drunk” on the night of the

Nur Hussein

[59]
Mr. Hussein did not see the part of the altercation that led to the death ofMr. Berhane, but saw the end of an earlier altercation involving Mr. Filli. Mr. Hussein was inthe kitchen of the café which was located at the front of the café with a window facing theDanforth. He was preparing a sandwich for a customer because the cook had left.
Mr. Hussein saw movement outside the window and heard a “commotion”. He could see agroup of people and he could hear them talking loudly. They seemed to be arguing. He wentoutside. It took him some time to get outside because he needed to go back through therestaurant to the door. When he got outside he saw many people coming from the bar andthey were arguing. He did not know what they were arguing about. He saw Mr. Filli and 3 to4 other people on the sidewalk. Mr. Hussein testified that the people were together “as if theywere hitting”. He saw them holding each other. Mr. Hussein had told the police in hisstatement that he saw them hitting and punching and fighting but in his testimony heexplained that he did not actually see this but saw them holding each other as if they hadbeen fighting.

[60]
He testified that Mr. Abraha appeared to be in the middle and seemed to beseparating people. Mr. Hussein said to the group, “[p]lease, I don’t want any trouble.”
Mr. Filli moved west and the others moved to the east. In the group of 3 or 4 that moved east,Mr. Hussein recognized Mr. Abraha. He also described a man with Mr. Abraha who matchedthe description of Mr. Ademnur. He did not remember Mr. Ademnur’s name but herecognized him. Mr. Hussein did not know the other two men in the group. Mr. Hussein wentback inside immediately when he saw that the group appeared to be dispersing.

[61]
Mr. Hussein was asked whether he saw Mr. Berhane in the group. He said, “I
don’t think so”. When he was then asked if he could say for sure, he said, “I am sure, yes”.

[62]
Mr. Hussein returned to the kitchen and continued to prepare the sandwich forthe customer. A short time after Mr. Hussein saw the first altercation, his attention was againdrawn to the sidewalk outside. He heard loud voices and saw a gathering of people. Thereseemed to be another altercation outside. Mr. Hussein finished making a sandwich and wentto the cash for the customer to pay for the food. He then went outside to see what had

- 10 -

happened. Although he told the police in his initial statement that about two minutes hadpassed between the first time he went out and the second time, Mr. Hussein testified that thiscould not be correct because before going out he went to the cash and took the payment forthe sandwich. When he went outside, he saw Mr. Abraha, the second man (Mr. Ademnur)
and Mr. Filli. A body was lying on the ground. Mr. Hussein was told that it was Mr. Berhaneon the ground. Mr. Filli was walking westbound in the middle of the street. Mr. Filli washolding something with his hand up and his fist clenched.

[63]
Mr. Hussein was cross-examined on his prior statement to the police and histestimony at the preliminary inquiry when he said that Mr. Berhane was “falling to theground” when Mr. Hussein came outside. Mr. Hussein said that he meant that Mr. Berhanewas already on the ground or had fallen to the ground. He explained that he had been givingthe statement in English and testifying in English. At one point in the statement he said,
“[t]he guy is fell down on the floor”. At another point he said “I see the guy on the floor.”
The statements that referred to “falling” to the ground are not inconsistent withMr. Hussein’s testimony at trial given his explanation and his difficulty with English. Heconceded that it was possible that at the moment that he stepped out of the restaurantMr. Berhane could have been falling to the ground, but that he did not see Mr. Berhane untilhe was on the ground.

[64]
Mr. Hussein testified that Mr. Berhane was lying on the sidewalk near thecurb and not close to the restaurant.
Fanieal Abraha

[65]
Fanieal Abraha was at Awash with Mr. Berhane the night of his death. Hetestified that he left the bar sometime after 1:00 a.m. and was smoking outside. He sawMr. Berhane outside closer to Lumar, talking with Maarg Abraha and two other men. One ofthe men met the description of Mr. Ademnur. Mr. Fanieal Abraha could not make out whatwas being said. Mr. Fanieal Abraha was only outside for 5-6 minutes and was not watchingthe whole time. Fanieal Abraha went back inside Awash. When he went outside again,Mr. Berhane was on the ground and Maarg Abraha was nearby. He did not see Mr. Filli at allthat night. Given the very limited time that Fanieal Abraha observed Mr. Berhane outside, hisevidence was of no value in determining the factual issues.
Hassan Hassan

[66]
Mr. Hassan had been at the Lumar Café the night of the fight. He was notdrinking or consuming drugs. He left Lumar to smoke a cigarette. When he left Lumar hesaw Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane standing in front of Lumar Café. He believed that there weretwo other men with them. He could not remember who the two other men were. Mr. Hassanwalked to the area in front of Awash and began talking to friends. There was no fight whenMr. Hassan first saw Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane outside Lumar.

[67]
Mr. Hassan was talking to his friends when he noticed that a fight had startednear Lumar. He saw Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane throwing punches at each other. He saw twopeople breaking up the fight. He did not know who the two people were who were trying tobreak up the fight.

- 11 -

- 12 -

[69]
Mr. Hassan was not watching the fight continuously because he believed it tobe a regular fight and because it appeared to be under control. Mr. Hassan saw Mr. Berhanefall to the ground. Mr. Berhane fell to the ground soon after the fight began.

[70]

Mr. Hassan called 911 immediately.

[71]

Mr. Hassan did not know how or why the fight started.

[72]
After Mr. Berhane was on the ground, people surrounded him. Mr. Hassan didnot see what happened to Mr. Filli after Mr. Berhane fell. Mr. Hassan went in and out ofLumar after the fight and was talking to the 911 operator.

[73]
Mr. Hassan knew Mr. Filli before the night of the fight though he rarely sawhim. He also knew Mr. Berhane. He was not friends with either. Mr. Hassan knewMr. Abraha. Mr. Abraha was a good friend of Mr. Hassan. Mr. Hassan was not sure that hehad seen Mr. Abraha that night. He said he may have seen Mr. Abraha after the fight.

[74]
Mr. Hassan was asked about his memory of the hand gestures that he said heobserved which led him to believe that the two men were breaking up the fight. He agreedthat at the preliminary inquiry he said he did not remember what behaviour he had observedthat led him to believe that the men were breaking up the fight. He agreed that when he wasasked at the preliminary inquiry whether the men could have been participating, he said hedid not remember.

[75]
Mr. Hassan agreed that he told the 911 operator that he was in Awash but hehad made a mistake. He said that he was upset at the time. He testified that as he wasspeaking to the 911 operator he was going in and out of Lumar. During the call he spoke topeople near him in Arabic. He was telling them to shut the doors so that nobody came afterthem. He agreed that he spoke to a police officer in Lumar after the police arrived. He mayhave told the officer that he was inside Lumar the whole time and only learned of theincident when the ambulance came. He did not remember what he said to the officer.

[76]
It is an agreed fact that the 911 call from Mr. Hassan was received at3:05:29 a.m. on September 27, 2014.
William Puritch

[77]
A 911 call from William Puritch was received at 3:07:44 a.m. Mr. Puritchtestified that he had walked westbound on the Danforth at around 3:00 a.m. on September 27,2014. He lived in the area and was walking to the store to buy cigarettes. He walked on thenorth side of Danforth and then crossed to the south side before reaching the area outsideAwash and Lumar. He was watching the activity outside carefully because he knows thatthere are often fights after the bars close and because he has balance issues. He saw no fightsas he walked past the area and entered the store. He bought cigarettes at 3:02 a.m. according

[68]
He explained that he thought that the two people were trying to break up thefight because the fight would have been bigger if the two were involved in the fight.
Mr. Hassan also testified that the hand motions of the two men appeared to him to indicatethat the men were trying to break up the fight.

to his receipt. He stayed in the store for a short time talking to the clerk. He left the store, lit acigarette and walked to the sidewalk on the south side of Danforth Avenue. As he began towalk eastbound, he heard a woman yell for help and ask him to call 911. When he lookedacross the street he saw the woman with someone on the ground. He also saw a man runningwestbound on the sidewalk about 30-40 meters from the man on the ground. Mr. Puritchcalled 911 and crossed the road.

[78]
Mr. Puritch helped attend to Mr. Berhane. Mr. Berhane was lying on thesidewalk near the road. Mr. Puritch stood on the road between two parked cars and was rightin front of Mr. Berhane. He recalled that one of the parked cars honked at him to move. Thatcar then left.
Osama FilliStatement to the Police

[79]
Mr. Filli, in his statement to the police on September 28, 2014, said that hehad been sitting on the planter outside Lumar and Mr. Berhane came and sat beside him.
Mr. Berhane was acting crazy, yelling and screaming. Mr. Filli said to Mr. Berhane, “[i]fyou’re drunk you can go home.” At another point in his statement, Mr. Filli said that he toldMr. Berhane to “respect the place”. Mr. Berhane then swore and yelled at Mr. Filli.
Mr. Berhane pointed at Mr. Filli and then he left. Mr. Berhane then returned with otherpeople and wanted to fight with Mr. Filli. Mr. Filli said “I start to—I tried to move him back,he don’t wanna move back. The people that with him they were pushing me to the street.
And I so like there is not choice anyways I have to defence – if I didn’t defence then they’llkill me, the three of them.”

[80]
At another point in his statement when asked to describe what each of thethree men were doing in the fight, Mr. Filli said that Mr. Berhane was hitting him and theother man (describing Mr. Abraha) was standing between them. Mr. Abraha pushed Mr. Fillitowards the street and hit Mr. Filli with his head. The third man was standing beside him.

[81]
The officer asked Mr. Filli about a small cut on his hand and Mr. Filli said thathe fell down during the fight.

[82]
Mr. Filli expressed disbelief that Mr. Berhane had died. He said that he didnot want to kill him, he said, “I was about just push him back- like give him scratch orsomething.”
Examination-in-Chief

[83]
In his examination-in-chief, Mr. Filli testified that Mr. Berhane came and satbeside him on the planter. Mr. Berhane seemed upset. Mr. Filli said that Mr. Berhane wastalking about something but he could not remember what he was talking about. Suddenly,Mr. Berhane got angry. He yelled and swore and pushed Mr. Filli. Mr. Berhane saidsomething like, “[g]et out of here.” The two men stood and they yelled and screamed at eachother. Mr. Filli was asking Mr. Berhane why he pushed him. Mr. Berhane was swearing.
Mr. Hussein came out of Lumar. Mr. Abraha was close by. Mr. Abraha said something like,

- 13 -

- 14 -

[84]
Mr. Abraha, Mr. Ademnur and Mr. Berhane subsequently returned toMr. Filli. Mr. Filli testified that Mr. Berhane punched him on the left side of his face.
Mr. Filli stood and pushed Mr. Berhane. Mr. Abraha and Mr. Berhane pushed him back.
Mr. Filli said that “Selim pulled me or something like that. I fell down to the ground.” Afterhe fell to the ground, both Mr. Abraha and Mr. Ademnur began kicking him. Mr. Filli stoodup. Mr. Abraha held him by his shirt. Mr. Berhane was behind Mr. Abraha, trying to hitMr. Filli. Mr. Filli tried to step back from them. Mr. Ademnur was standing to Mr. Filli’sright side. Mr. Ademnur was not doing anything, but was blocking his way. Mr. Filli thenbegan to step forward because he was scared of the traffic behind him.

[85]
Mr. Filli was asked what Mr. Abraha was doing while he held Mr. Filli’s shirt.
Mr. Filli said that Mr. Abraha was talking and screaming and yelling, but Mr. Filli could notunderstand what he was saying. He was shaking Mr. Filli and pushing him. Mr. Filli wasasked why he did not run away. He said that he could not run away. Mr. Abraha was in frontof him holding his shirt. Mr. Ademnur, who was a large man, was standing beside him. Hewas between two parked cars and the street was behind him. He was getting pushed out intothe street.

[86]
Mr. Filli testified that he was scared that they were going to kill him orsomething. He decided to take out his knife and use it. He planned to just “give him somepain to distract him.” He planned to use the knife on Mr. Berhane because “he’s the one whostarted the fight and the guys were kicking me and angry for me because he was…upset fromme. And I thought like if I stop him, they’re going to stop too.” Mr. Filli took out the knifeand stabbed Mr. Berhane. He tried to hit Mr. Berhane on his arm or shoulder. After strikingat Mr. Berhane the first time Mr. Filli did not believe that he had hit him, so he swung asecond time. He believed that he struck Mr. Berhane in the shoulder the second time. He sawMr. Berhane step back towards Lumar. Mr. Hussein came out of Lumar as Mr. Berhane fellto the ground near the Lumar Cafe. Mr. Abraha and Mr. Ademnur stepped back fromMr. Filli. Mr. Abraha said something like, “you carry a knife.”

[87]
Someone else said “run away” and Mr. Filli ran. He testified that he wasscared that other people would attack him. Mr. Filli went back to the shelter where he wasstaying.

[88]
The next evening Mr. Filli went to see his friend Faisal Berhan to try to findout what had happened to the man he had stabbed. He was not able to find out. He went backto the shelter. He was arrested the next morning.
Cross-Examination

[89]
In cross-examination, Mr. Filli testified that when Mr. Berhane came and saton the planter with him he was initially happy because someone was sitting with him.
However, Mr. Berhane was whispering and looking at the ground. Mr. Berhane was talkingto himself. He got louder and was swearing. Mr. Filli could not remember what Mr. Berhanewas talking about. Mr. Filli said something to Mr. Berhane. He may have told him to show

“let’s go” to Mr. Berhane. Mr. Berhane and Mr. Abraha moved east. Mr. Filli sat back downon the planter.

- 15 -

[90]
After the yelling and pushing, Mr. Hussein came out of Lumar. Mr. Abrahatook Mr. Berhane away. Mr. Hussein asked Mr. Filli what happened and he told him that
“these guys are drunk and trying to fight with me.” Mr. Filli testified that Mr. Hussein thenspoke to Mr. Abraha and Mr. Berhane and went back into Lumar. Mr. Filli went back to theplanter and sat down.

[91]
Within a very short time Mr. Berhane came back to the planter and punchedMr. Filli. Mr. Filli could not say where Mr. Ademnur and Mr. Abraha were whenMr. Berhane punched him. Mr. Filli stood and pushed Mr. Berhane. It was at this point thatMr. Abraha and Mr. Ademnur became involved. Mr. Filli was asked in cross-examination:
“and then they sort of grab you and pull you to the road? How does that work?” Heanswered: “I don’t know how is it happened. It was quick. But I ended up falling to theground.”

[92]
Mr. Filli testified that after he fell to the ground, Mr. Abraha andMr. Ademnur both kicked him. They were strong kicks. When he got to his feet from theground, Mr. Abraha was holding him and Mr. Berhane was trying to hit him from behind.

[93]
Near the end of his second day of cross-examination, Mr. Filli testified thatMr. Abraha head-butted him as he was getting up from the ground.

[94]
Mr. Filli was asked why he did not leave after the first altercation. He said thathe thought everything was fine after Mr. Hussein came out. He was asked why he did notleave after Mr. Berhane punched him. He said, “yeah but they made it to get involved himand so I pushed him.” He agreed that he could have retreated after the punch. He said,
“[o]bviously there’s a reason for getting punched in the face, so I gotta know…” He wasasked, “[y]ou were angry enough or upset enough to push him back?” And he replied,” [i]t’sa normal reaction I believe that anybody get.” The Crown asked Mr. Filli, “[s]o at that pointyou’re thinking, you want to fight, let’s fight? Before Maarg and Selim get involved, youwere saying, okay, let’s go, let’s fight?” Mr. Filli said, “I thought it’s a regular fight, yeah”.

[95]
At another point Mr. Filli explained that, “if somebody come and punch you,just you’re going to sit down and wait for him you know. I think—of course there is areaction.” He was asked, “you were going to get in a fight with him? And he answered,
“[a]fter I—exactly yeah”. He was asked, “you could have left? And he answered, “Whywould I leave?” The Crown then said, “[e]xactly. Why would you leave? You wanted tofight, correct?” and Mr. Filli said “no, but I had no reason to leave. Like, okay, like forexample, you’re sitting and I came and punched you, are you going to leave?” At asubsequent point, Mr. Filli said that he did not want to fight.

[96]
Mr. Filli was asked whether the only reason that he did not run was becauseMr. Abraha was holding him. He said, “he was holding me and I was not thinking clearly,cause I want to know what—how this—why all this happening, you know.” He said that hewas scared for his life. He was asked, “so Maarg held you and if he didn’t hold you, you

respect. He may have told him that he could go home if he was drunk. He may have said
“what’s wrong? What happened?” Then Mr. Berhane pushed Mr. Filli. They began yelling ateach other. Mr. Filli was saying things like “you don’t need to push me”.

- 16 -

[97]
Mr. Filli was asked why he did not stab Mr. Abraha or Mr. Ademnur if thesewere the people who had tried to push him into traffic and who had kicked him on theground. He said, “Maarg by himself can’t do nothing to me.” At the time that he took out hisknife, Mr. Ademnur was not doing anything.

[98]
Mr. Filli also explained that he reached past Mr. Abraha to stab Mr. Berhanebecause “they did that because the other guy was mad at me.”

[99]
Mr. Filli said that he stabbed Mr. Berhane and ran. He was afraid that otherswould attack him.

[100]
Mr. Filli agreed that he had not said anything to the police about being kickedby Mr. Ademnur and Mr. Abraha. He said that when he spoke to the police he was not veryaccurate with the details.

[101]
Mr. Filli testified that he had spoken to his friend Faisal Berhan about whathad happened the night before his arrest. He said that he was not detailed. He left beforeMr. Yuanes arrived because he did not like Mr. Yuanes. Mr. Filli denied that he left to avoidbeing arrested for the stabbing.

[102]
Mr. Filli was asked about his thinking around the time of the incident. Heagreed that he told a nurse practitioner on September 25, 2014 that he was having “crazyideas.” He testified that by this he meant that he was homeless and under stress and havingunusual ideas.

[103]
Mr. Filli denied that after his arrest he told Nurse Edmondson at the TorontoSouth Detention Center that Risperidone makes him do some crazy things and that was whyhe was in jail.

[104]
Mr. Filli denied that he was having crazy thoughts at the time of the fight withMr. Berhane.

[105]
Mr. Filli was questioned about telling the police in his statement, “they startpushing… me on the street so they can take [their] time, you know.” He said,So much thing was going on in my head, you know, so I wasshocked. I was okay with these people and now they arefighting with me. So I thought like…too much thing was goingon in my mind. I thought they were going to kidnap me. I
thought they were going to kill me, I thought they…too muchthing was going on at that time.

[106]
When asked in cross-examination about his belief that they would kidnap him,Mr. Filli said, “[o]ne of the things that was going on in my brain, cause they –they were okaywith me and then they came and attack me, so too much thing was going on. I was thinking

would have left?” He answered, “I don’t know…It’s just happen quick, I can’t tell you howdo I felt between these seconds…”

- 17 like…what is all this about, you know? I didn’t do nothing wrong. So these guys are up tosomething dangerous, so I gotta do something before I get killed.”

[107]
Neil Monck was called as a witness by the defence. He testified onFebruary 17, 2017 and was recalled to the stand on March 6, 2017. Mr. Monck was a towtruck driver. He was driving on the Danforth in the early morning hours of September 27,2014.

[108]
Initially in his evidence Mr. Monck said that he had been driving home fromwork in his personal vehicle and was not driving a tow truck. He was driving eastbound onthe Danforth. When he passed Greenwood Avenue he noticed a green Lamborghini parkedon the south side of Danforth east of Greenwood. He saw a man get out of the driver’s side ofthe Lamborghini and get involved in a fight with about 5 other men in the middle of DanforthAvenue. Mr. Monck testified that the Lamborghini was parked just east of LadysmithAvenue. The fight was in the middle of the street west of the Lamborghini. Mr. Moncktestified that he slowed to a crawl. It took him 20 to 30 seconds to pass the area. His attentionwas focused first on the car and then on the fight. He testified that the fight was in thewestbound lane of the road, sufficiently close to the center line of the roadway that he had toswerve into the curb lane to avoid the fight.

[109]
Mr. Monck described the fight. He said that he saw a man on the ground whowas being kicked. The man from the Lamborghini was one of 5 or 6 men involved in thefight. Mr. Monck did not see the man from the Lamborghini punch or kick anyone.
Mr. Monck could not say how many people kicked the man on the ground. He described thedriver of the Lamborghini as being in his early 20’s, skinny and 5’7” to 5’10” tall. He said hehad dark skin and curly hair. Mr. Monck could not describe anyone else in the fight.

[110]
His description of the man from the sports car was similar to the descriptiongiven by Mr. Hussein of a customer who had a sports car. Mr. Hussein testified that aroundSeptember 2014 there was a Saudi student who owned a Porsche and had rented a car similarto the one described by Mr. Monck. Mr. Hussein did not know when the man had rented thecar. The man was described by Mr. Hussein as being around 22 years-old. He was skinny andaround 5’6” or 5’7” tall. His skin was light brown. Mr. Hussein did not see this man in theearly morning of September 27, 2014. He did not see him involved in the fight. Mr. Husseindid not see the sports car that night.

[111]
Mr. Monck described in detail his route across the intersection of Greenwoodand Danforth. He said that he saw the Lamborghini just after he went through the intersectionat Greenwood and Danforth. He then saw the fight.

[112]
He did not stop but continued eastbound. He stopped around Main andDanforth to try to get some food. He heard on his handheld police scanner that there had beena stabbing at Greenwood and Danforth. He returned to Greenwood and Danforth to tell thepolice what he had observed. He parked his car on the north side of the Danforth, east of thearea of the fight. He could not drive through because the road was blocked.

Neil Monck

[113]
Mr. Monck was shown the video surveillance footage of the area around thefight. He was asked whether he could identify his car but he could not do so. Mr. Monckstated with certainty that he was not driving a tow truck when he drove by and saw the fight.
He said that he heard about the fight on the scanner which is used in the tow truck but that hehad taken the handheld scanner from his tow truck and turned it on in his car. Mr. Monckdescribed in detail where he had left his truck. Mr. Monck was adamant that he could nothave been driving a Ford tow truck that morning because he did not drive Ford trucks.

[114]
Mr. Monck agreed that, when he spoke to the police the morning of the event,he did not tell police that he saw a person on the ground being kicked. He told the police thatthere were “five or six of them fighting” and that they were “going at it”. When he was askedif he saw what the people, other than the driver of the sports car, looked like, he told thepolice “I didn’t really ’cause they were all bundled—you know what I mean—they werefighting—so I didn’t really…”.

[115]
Mr. Monck said that he did not mention the kicking because the police did notask about it. He agreed that he frequently saw fights in the area around Greenwood andDanforth, before and after this incident. He said that he has seen fighting in the street andpeople being kicked.

[116]

Mr. Monck was certain that the fighting was not on or near the sidewalk.

[117]
Mr. Monck was cross-examined about the vehicle he was driving. He deniedthat it was a tow truck and specifically denied that it was the tow truck that appears in thevideo surveillance. He denied giving the police officer who took his statement his licenseplate number. He denied that the police officer walked him back to his vehicle after takinghis statement.

[118]
After Mr. Monck’s testimony the Crown sought to call reply evidence thatcontradicted Mr. Monck’s testimony. I ruled that the proposed reply evidence was notcollateral and would be permitted. I also ruled that in fairness, the defence should bepermitted to recall Mr. Monck to address the evidence that contradicted aspects of histestimony. He was recalled.

[119]
Mr. Monck, when he was recalled, agreed that he was driving a tow truck themorning of September 27, 2014. It was a Ford tow truck. He identified his tow truck on thesurveillance video. The video shows the tow truck drive by the area of the fight beforeMr. Abraha and Mr. Ademnur walk back from the bus stop, that is, before the fight starts.

[120]
Mr. Monck agreed that he approached the intersection from the south and notfrom the west. He agreed that he came back and gave his statement to the police, leaving histruck in the Esso station on the southeast corner of Greenwood and Danforth. He agreed thatas shown in video footage, the officer walked him to his tow truck after the statement. Heagreed that he had been mistaken about all of these matters when he first gave his evidence.

[121]
Mr. Monck insisted that he was sure about his memory of a fight in the middleof the Danforth and that he saw 5 or 6 men kicking someone on the ground. Mr. Monck was

- 18 -

- 19 -

certain that the fight was going on when he drove past and that he had to move to the right tobe sure to avoid hitting them.

[122]
The video surveillance from 1196 Danforth Avenue (Exhibit 11) assists withthe timing of some of the events. The surveillance does not show the fight between Mr. Filliand Mr. Berhane.

[123]
A person identified as Temesgen walked westbound on the north side ofDanforth Avenue at 2:49 a.m. followed by Mr. Abraha about 40 second later andMr. Ademnur about 30 seconds after Mr. Abraha. Mr. Abraha is easily identifiable on thevideo because he had a blonde streak in his hair that night.

[124]
At 2:59 a.m. a tow truck identified by Neil Monck as the tow truck he wasdriving, turned right onto the Danforth from Greenwood Avenue and proceeded eastbound at2:59 a.m.

[125]
At 3:00 a.m. Mr. Ademnur and Mr. Abraha walked eastbound back towardsthe area of the Lumar Café.

[126]
At 3:02 a.m., an individual walked westbound on the south side of Danforthand turned right into the “On the Run” store where William Puritch testified he boughtcigarettes at 3:02 a.m. An individual can be seen leaving the “On the Run” and walkingeastbound at 3:03:35 a.m.

[127]
At 3:04:58 a.m., a green sports car drove westbound on Danforth and turnedleft to go south on Greenwood.

[128]
Avenue.

At 3:05:19 a.m., Mr. Filli ran westbound on the north sidewalk of Danforth

[129]
At 3:10:22 a.m., the green sports car pulled into the gas station on thesouthwest corner of Danforth and Greenwood and remained there until 3:10:54 a.m. when itdrove westbound on Danforth Avenue.

[130]
It is an agreed fact that Mr. Hassan called 911 at 3:05:29 a.m. It is also agreedthat the 911 call from William Puritch was received at 3:07:44 a.m. The police arrived onscene at 3:11:27 am.
III

APPROACH TO THE EVIDENCE

General Principles

[131]
With that review of the evidence, I will now set out some general principlesgoverning my approach to the evidence before turning to my analysis and findings on theissue of self-defence.

[132]
In determining the issues in this trial, I have considered and weighed theevidence as a whole.

Video Surveillance

[1]
Mr. Filli testified and said that he acted in self-defence. He gave an account of thefight and of his reasons for stabbing Mr. Berhane. As with any witness, I must assess thecredibility and reliability of Mr. Filli’s evidence and I must do so in the context of all of theevidence. The focus in this case has been on the divergent versions of the fight offered byOsama Filli and Maarg Abraha. The assessment of Mr. Filli’s evidence is not a contestbetween his version of events and the version advanced by the evidence of the Crownwitnesses, in particular by Maarg Abraha.

[2]
If I accept Mr. Filli’s evidence or if it raises a reasonable doubt, I must acquitMr. Filli. Even if I reject Mr. Filli’s evidence, I may only convict him if the Crown hassatisfied me beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Filli did not act in self-defence.

[133]
In assessing the credibility and reliability of the witnesses to the fight, otherthan Mr. Filli, I have considered their possible motivation to lie to protect themselves orothers.

[134]
I have considered the prior statements of witnesses that are inconsistent withtheir testimony and any explanation offered for the inconsistency.

[135]
In assessing the evidence of the witnesses in this case I have considered thatthe reliability of the observations and recollections of the witnesses may have been affectedby the conditions under which the observations were made and the ability of the witness toremember the events. In this case, the fight that ended with the fatal stab wounds toMr. Berhane was a dynamic and fast-moving situation. The situation was extremely stressfulfor all who observed it. Intoxication affected the reliability of the observations andrecollections of several witnesses.
Approach to the Evidence of Maarg Abraha and Selim Ademnur

[136]
I have approached the evidence of Maarg Abraha with caution. Mr. Abraha’sevidence was problematic in several ways.

[137]
Overall, Mr. Abraha was an evasive witness. He declined to answer questions.
He questioned why he needed to answer questions about his conduct on the night of thestabbing.

[138]
Mr. Abraha was vague regarding the amount of alcohol that he had consumed.
He testified that he drank 6 or 7, or 8 beers at the park when asked in his examination-inchief. He said that he drank more at the bar but did not know how much. He said that friendshad bought beer for him. His evidence regarding his level of intoxication was not credible.
He testified in his examination-in-chief that on an average weekend night he would consume13 or 14 beers if he “wanted to” do so. Mr. Abraha testified that after having 13 or 14 beershe would just want to “sing and chat”. He testified that it would take about 22 or even 30
beers to make him drunk. He said that he was “not really too drunk that night”.

[139]
Mr. Abraha did not tell the police about drinking in the park with Mr. Filliwhen he gave his statement to the police on September 27, 2014. He testified that this wasbecause of his poor command of the English language. He testified that when he told them

- 20 -

- 21 that Mr. Filli drank everywhere and drank from a bag, he was talking about Mr. Filli’sdrinking in the park.

[141]
issues.

I have approached the evidence of Mr. Abraha with caution in light of these

[142]
There are also reasons to approach the evidence of Mr. Ademnur’s statementswith caution. There was no opportunity for cross-examination. Mr. Ademnur left the countryat the time that the police were trying to subpoena him to give evidence at the preliminaryinquiry. He did not return for the trial although he was aware of the trial date. By his ownadmission, Mr. Ademnur was very drunk the night of the fight.

[143]
Mr. Ademnur and Mr. Abraha were together outside the Lumar Café beforethe police arrived. P.C. Perks arrived on scene at 3:14 a.m. and was directed to Mr. Abrahaand Mr. Ademnur. He spoke to them separately and remained with them after that point untilhe took them to the police station to give statements. Both Mr. Ademnur and Mr. Abrahagave statements on the morning of September 27, 2014. They then left the police stationtogether and spoke with one another before returning during the evening for the photo lineups and further statements. Mr. Ademnur insisted on remaining with Mr. Abraha at the sceneand when they were initially taken to the police station. The two men had an opportunity tocollude when the police were not with them.

[144]
I have approached the statements of Mr. Ademnur with caution in light ofthese problems.
Approach to the Exculpatory Statement of Osama Filli

[145]
The exculpatory statement of Mr. Filli to the police following his arrest onSeptember 28, 2014 was admitted into evidence. The Crown sought a ruling at the outset ofthe trial that the statement was voluntary in order to be able to use the statement to crossexamine Mr. Filli should he testify. Mr. Filli conceded voluntariness. Mr. Filli then sought tolead the statement as part of his defence. In a previous ruling, I admitted the statement andindicated that I would determine the weight to be given to different portions of the statementat the end of the trial.

[146]
The statement is a videotaped statement made by Mr. Filli to the police about7 hours following his arrest and almost 40 hours after the stabbing. The night before hisarrest Mr. Filli had attended at Faisal Berhan’s apartment to try to find out what hadhappened to the person with whom he had fought. Mr. Berhan did not tell him. Mr. Fillitestified that he first learned that Mr. Berhane had died during the police interview. Mr. Fillialso said that he had not believed that he had seriously injured Mr. Berhane or that he wouldbe facing a criminal investigation before his arrest on September 28, 2014.

[147]
Counsel for Mr. Filli argued that Mr. Filli’s entire statement to the police wasspontaneous. Counsel submitted that the statement, although not admissible for the truth ofits contents, is relevant to show Mr. Filli’s reaction to the information that Mr. Berhane had

[140]
Mr. Abraha’s conduct in changing his clothes after the fight and hisexplanation for that conduct raise concerns.

- 22 -

[148]
I find that the portion of Mr. Filli’s statement in which he expressed disbeliefand then dismay at the information that Mr. Berhane had died was spontaneous. Mr. Filliappeared to be genuinely surprised to learn that Mr. Berhane had died from his wounds.
Based on the totality of the evidence, I accept that Mr. Filli did not know that Mr. Berhanehad died until his arrest.

[149]
I do not find the other parts of the statement to be spontaneous. Mr. Filli had40 hours to think about the fight and his use of the knife. Although he may not have expectedto be investigated and charged by the police, he was aware that he had stabbed a man. WhileMr. Filli may not have considered his version of events for the purpose of a policeinvestigation, he did consider his version of events for the purposes of explaining himself.
Mr. Filli attended at Faisal Berhan’s house to find out about the condition of the man hestabbed. Mr. Filli testified that he told Mr. Berhan it was a three on one fight. Mr. Fillitestified that he left Mr. Berhan’s apartment because he knew that Mr. Yuanes was comingover and he did not like Mr. Yuanes. Mr.Filli knew Mr. Yuanes to be an older member of hiscommunity who had taken an interest in Mr. Filli’s affairs in the past. I find that Mr. Fillimust have been thinking about the justification for his actions in the 40 hours before hispolice statement. Other than the part of the statement that shows Mr. Filli’s reaction to thedeath of Mr. Berhane, I give the statement no weight as evidence showing consistency withMr. Filli’s trial testimony.
Approach to the Statement of Mr. Filli to Nurse Edmondson

[150]
I previously ruled that the Crown could lead evidence of a statement thatMs. Cheryl Edmondson, a nurse at the Toronto South Detention Centre, recorded as havingbeen made by Mr. Filli after his arrest and detention. Mr. Filli testified that he did not believethat he made the statement as recorded by Ms. Edmondson. The recorded statement is thefollowing: “[o]n Risperidone, believes he has mental health issues. Believes Risperidonemakes him do crazy things – that’s why in jail.”

[151]
The record was made in the course of a medical assessment. Mr. Filli’s wordswere not recorded verbatim. Ms. Edmondson’s focus was on her assessment of Mr. Filli’smedical needs. The statement, as I indicated in my ruling, is somewhat ambiguous. Mr. Fillitestified and denied having made the statement. Having considered the statement in thecontext of the trial evidence including Mr. Filli’s testimony, I cannot conclude that Mr. Fillisaid the words attributed to him in the statement. I find the statement to have no probativevalue.
Post-offence Conduct Evidence

[152]
The Crown relies on the evidence of Mr. Filli’s flight from the scene as postoffence conduct evidence.

died and it is relevant to Mr. Filli’s credibility because of its consistency with his trialevidence.

- 23 As set out by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in R. v. Peavoy:1
Evidence of after-the-fact conduct is commonly admitted toshow that an accused person has acted in a manner which,based on human experience and logic, is consistent with theconduct of a guilty person and inconsistent with the conduct ofan innocent person. The after-the-fact conduct is said toindicate an awareness on the part of the accused person that heor she has acted unlawfully and without a valid defence for theconduct in question. It can only be used by the trier of fact inthis manner if any innocent explanation for the conduct isrejected. That explanation may be expressly stated in theevidence, such as when the accused testifies, or it may arisefrom the trier of fact's appreciation of human nature and howpeople react to unusual and stressful situations. It is for the trierof fact to determine what inference, if any, should be drawnfrom the evidence.

[154]
The post-offence conduct evidence in this case must be weighed in the contextof all of the evidence, including the explanation offered by Mr. Filli. Mr. Filli testified that hefled because he heard someone tell him to run and he was afraid that other people wouldcome after him. This explanation makes sense in the circumstances. There were a number ofpeople in the area after the stabbing. Some were friends of Mr. Berhane. Mr. Hassan, one ofthe witnesses, can be heard on the 911 recording telling Mr. Hussein to lock the doors of theLumar Café so that no one could come after them. Maarg Abraha testified that when hereturned to the scene after changing his clothes people told him to leave. On all of theevidence, the explanation by Mr. Filli for fleeing the scene is reasonable and I cannot rejectit. I therefore give no weight to the evidence of flight.
IV

[155]

SELF-DEFENCE – LEGAL PRINCIPLES
Section 34 of the Criminal Code provides as follows:
34. (1)

A person is not guilty of an offence if
(a) they believe on reasonable grounds that force isbeing used against them or another person or that athreat of force is being made against them or anotherperson;
(b) the act that constitutes the offence is committedfor the purpose of defending or protectingthemselves or the other person from that use or threatof force; and

1

[1997] O.J. No. 2788 (C.A.), at paras. 26-27

[153]

- 24 -

(2) In determining whetherreasonable in the circumstances,the relevant circumstances of theand the act, including, but notfactors:

is

reasonable

in

the

the act committed isthe court shall considerperson, the other partieslimited to, the following

(a) the nature of the force or threat;
(b) the extent to which the use of force wasimminent and whether there were other meansavailable to respond to the potential use of force;
(c) the person’s role in the incident;
(d) whether any party to the incident used orthreatened to use a weapon;
(e) the size, age, gender and physical capabilities ofthe parties to the incident;
(f) the nature, duration and history of anyrelationship between the parties to the incident,including any prior use or threat of force and thenature of that force or threat;
(f.1) any history of interaction or communicationbetween the parties to the incident;
(g) the nature and proportionality of the person’sresponse to the use or threat of force; and
(h) whether the act committed was in response to ause or threat of force that the person knew waslawful.

[156]
The onus is on the Crown to disprove self-defence. The Crown may disproveself-defence by demonstrating beyond a reasonable doubt that one or more of therequirements for the defence does not apply.

[157]

There is a subjective and an objective component to self-defence.

[158]
In R. v. Pétel,2 Lamer C.J.C. described the subjective and objective aspects ofthe elements of the former s. 34(2):

2

[1994] 1 S.C.R. 3 at pp. 12-13

(c) the act committedcircumstances.

- 25 -

[159]
Doherty J.A. in R. v. Craig,3 explained the subjective and objectivecomponents of the prior self-defence provisions as follows:
The elements of self-defence in s. 34(2) as described in Pételhave both a subjective and objective component. For example,an accused must actually apprehend the risk of death orgrievous bodily harm. This is a subjective inquiry into the mindof the accused at the relevant time. That apprehension,however, must be reasonable in the circumstances as perceivedby the accused. This is an objective inquiry that serves to limitthe defence to circumstances where the accused's conductwould be seen as normatively justified. [Citations omitted.]

[160]
Intoxication may affect the subjective perception of the accused. However,the objective reasonableness component of self-defence is based on a sober person facing therelevant threat of force.4 Individual factors may be considered in determining reasonableness.
As articulated by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Lavallee, “the issue is not howeverwhat an outsider would reasonably have perceived but what the accused reasonablyperceived given [his] situation and [his] experience.”5

[161]
The current self-defence provisions maintain the subjective and objectivecomponents of the defence. As summarized by the New Brunswick Court of Appeal in R. v.
Cormier:6
Section 34(1) enumerates three criteria, all of which must bepresent for the defence to be available. In other words, selfdefence is not applicable if the prosecution proves beyond areasonable doubt that one of these criteria has not been met.
They are:
1) Reasonable belief: the accused must reasonably believe thatforce or threat of force is being used against him or someoneelse (the subjective perception is objectively verified);2) Defensive purpose: the subjective purpose for respondingto the threat must be to protect oneself or others (this is asubjective state of mind); and3) Reasonable response: the act committed must be reasonablein the circumstances (this is objectively assessed).
3

2011 ONCA 142, 269 C.C.C. (3d) 61 at para. 36
R. v. Reilly, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 396, at p. 405
5
R. v. Lavallee, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 852 at para. 51
6
2017 NBCA 10 at para 40; see also R. v. Bengy 2015 ONCA 397
4

… the jury must seek to determine how the accused perceivedthe relevant facts and whether that perception was reasonable.
Accordingly, this is an objective determination.

[162]
In assessing the reasonableness of the response under s. 34(1)(c), otherprinciples enunciated under the prior self-defence provisions remain applicable. An accusedneed not wait until he or she is assaulted before acting, and an accused is not by law requiredto retreat before acting in self-defence.7 The imminence of the threat, the existence ofalternative means to respond and the actions taken by the accused are factors that a trier offact must consider to determine if the act committed by the accused was reasonable in all thecircumstances. An accused is not required to “weigh with nicety” the force used in responseto the perceived use or threat of force. The defensive action need not be strictly proportionateto the threat faced by the accused. The proportionality of the force is a factor to be consideredin assessing the reasonableness of the force. 8
V

ANALYSIS ON THE ISSUE OF SELF-DEFENCE

[163]
For self-defence to apply, s. 34(1)(a) requires that the person using force todefend himself believe on reasonable grounds that force is being used against him or that athreat of force is being made against him. In this case, it is agreed that Mr. Filli believed onreasonable grounds that force was being used against him or that a threat of force was beingmade against him.

[164]
The Crown has not conceded s. 34(1)(b). This subsection requires that the actbe committed for the purpose of self-defence. The Crown must disprove this element beyonda reasonable doubt in order to disprove self-defence. The Crown’s position is that Mr. Filliacted in a targeted manner against Mr. Berhane who was unarmed and did not present adanger to Mr. Filli at the time that Mr. Filli used the knife.

[165]
Even if Mr. Filli has raised a reasonable doubt with respect to his purposeunder s. 34(1)(b), it is the Crown’s position that the act of stabbing was not reasonable asrequired by s. 34(1)(c) and that self-defence has therefore been disproven.

[166]
The three elements of self-defence under s. 34(1) cannot be considered inisolation. The nature of the force or threat of force faced by Mr. Filli must be considered inassessing the reasonableness of the act said to be committed in self-defence. The nature ofthe act committed and the circumstances are relevant to the determination of whether the actswere for the purpose of self-defence.

[167]
In assessing whether the Crown has disproven self-defence beyond areasonable doubt, I must take into account the nature of the threat that Mr. Filli reasonablybelieved he faced at the time that he stabbed Mr. Berhane.

[168]
The evidence diverges on whether Mr. Filli faced one or three assailants. Heclearly faced the threat of force from Mr. Berhane. Mr. Berhane was a stranger to Mr. Filli. I
find that Mr. Berhane was intoxicated.

[169]
The evidence is clear that Mr. Berhane had been drinking in the hours leadingup to the fight. I accept the evidence of the witnesses that Mr. Berhane was not a person who7

R. v. Sinclair, 2017 ONCA 38, R. v. Cormier, 2017 NBCA 10
R. v. Levy, 2016 NSCA 45, 337 C.C.C. (3d) 476 at para. 112; R. v. Baxter (1975), 27 C.C.C. (2d) 96
(Ont. C.A.)
8

- 26 -

generally became intoxicated. He would generally only drink about two beers and would notbe affected by alcohol. Mr. Berhane drank much more than two beers on the night before hisdeath. I do not accept the evidence of his friends who testified that he was unaffected by thealcohol that he consumed. Mr. Berhane was unaccustomed to drinking 7 to 9 drinks. Hewould have been intoxicated. Mr. Berhane was not someone who was known to fight whenhe drank. However, he drank much more than usual and it is clear from the evidence that hewillingly fought with Mr. Filli. Mr. Berhane initiated the fight with Mr. Filli. He would notbe dissuaded from fighting in spite of the efforts of Mr. Abraha.

[170]
When the fight began, it was a fight between Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane.
Mr. Filli had also been drinking although he had stopped drinking about two and a half hoursbefore the fight.

[171]
There were two stages to the fight. In the first, there was pushing and yellingbetween Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane. This first confrontation ended when Mr. Hussein cameout of Lumar and when Maarg Abraha led Mr. Berhane away from Mr. Filli.

[172]
In making this finding, I reject Mr. Abraha’s evidence on this point.
Mr. Abraha’s testimonial denial that there were two stages to the confrontation is inconsistentwith his original statement to the police officer at the scene in which he said that he “took
[Mr. Berhane] away.” His evidence at trial was that he made an effort to convinceMr. Berhane to leave the area. His trial evidence was convoluted on this point. Although hesaid that he tried to convince Mr. Berhane to leave, it is unclear when this could haveoccurred in the sequence he describes. Mr. Abraha had been drinking a great deal on thenight of the fight. While he denied that alcohol affected his memory, I find that Mr. Abraha’sability to observe and recall the details and sequence of events in the fight was affected byhis impairment. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that there was an initialconfrontation that was ended by Mr. Hussein coming out and by Mr. Abraha leadingMr. Berhane away.

[173]
In reaching this conclusion I rely on the evidence of Mr. Filli which wassupported by the evidence of Nur Hussein. I find that Mr. Hussein was a credible witness.
Mr. Hussein had not consumed any alcohol. He appeared in his testimony to be trying to beas accurate as possible. He admitted to weaknesses in his ability to observe and recall. Hewas consistent however in his account of the central events. He was certain that there weretwo incidents of conflict outside the Lumar Café and that the second incident ended with thestabbing death of Mr. Berhane.

[174]
With respect to the first conflict, although Mr. Hussein did not seeMr. Berhane, he did see a conflict between Mr. Filli and others. He saw Mr. Abrahaintervening to de-escalate the conflict. He saw Mr. Abraha and a man I infer wasMr. Ademnur walking away with two other men. Mr. Hussein has poor eyesight andalthough he said that he did not see Mr. Berhane, I find that Mr. Berhane was part of thegroup that left the first confrontation.

[175]
In the first stage of the fight, Mr. Berhane and Mr. Filli yelled at each otherand pushed each other. There was no serious physical violence. The situation appeared to be

- 27 -

- 28 -

[176]
The second stage of the fight and the involvement of Mr. Abraha andMr. Ademnur is central to my determination of whether the Crown has disproven selfdefence. The first stage of the fight provides a backdrop to the subsequent confrontation.

[177]
Mr. Filli’s account at trial of the details of the second part of the fight was inmany respects inconsistent with his statement to the police. Mr. Filli failed to tell the policethat he was kicked; he failed to tell the police that he was held; he failed to tell them thatMr. Ademnur applied force to him. These inconsistencies between his statement upon arrestand his testimony at trial are troubling.

[178]
While I accept Mr. Filli’s evidence that Mr. Abraha intervened in the fight andused force against Mr. Filli, I do not accept that Mr. Abraha and Mr. Ademnur kickedMr. Filli on the ground.

[179]
I have considered the evidence of Mr. Puritch and Mr. Hassan. Mr. Puritchwas in the store across the street for the duration of the fight. Mr. Puritch was not present forthe fight. Mr. Hassan was not paying attention to the whole of the fight, believing it to havebeen broken up when the two men intervened. The evidence of these witnesses has somevalue when considered in light of the totality of the evidence. The fight could not havestarted until about 3:02 a.m. when Mr. Puritch was in the store. Mr. Filli had run away by3:05:19 a.m. Mr. Hassan saw the fight begin, saw people intervene and de-escalate the fightand then saw Mr. Berhane injured and falling within a very short period of time.

[180]
I find that Mr. Abraha did more than stand passively between the two fightingmen, holding out his arms and telling them to calm down. Mr. Abraha’s evidence that hestood passively between Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane was implausible. Mr. Berhane was a goodfriend; he was like a brother to Mr. Abraha. Mr. Abraha believed Mr. Filli to be drunk ormentally ill. He had separated himself from Mr. Filli earlier.

[181]
In rejecting Mr. Abraha’s evidence that he did nothing more than standbetween the two men and try to hold them apart, I have taken into account Mr. Abraha’sconduct in leaving the scene of the fight to change his clothes while his good friend laydying. His conduct is not adequately explained by his professed shock at seeing blood on hisclothes. His conduct is consistent with a person engaged in deliberately hiding hisinvolvement in a violent incident. This conclusion is supported by Mr. Abraha’s statement tothe police after the fight: “[i]s this serious? Like blood on my clothes and shit…”. I find thatMr. Abraha changed his clothes because he was concerned about his involvement in a fightthat had ended in a stabbing. He was concerned because he had used force against Mr. Filli.

[182]
I accept the evidence of Mr. Filli, that Maarg Abraha pushed and head-buttedhim but I do not accept his evidence that he was kicked on the ground. Mr. Filli wasquestioned about the details of the fight when he was interviewed by the police. He gave adetailed account of the actions of each of the participants. His account at trial was materiallyinconsistent with his statement. He did not say that he was kicked. Mr. Hassan saw nofighting on the ground and saw the fight begin and end quickly. This is supported by the

defused when Mr. Hussein came out of the restaurant and when Mr. Abraha led Mr. Berhaneaway from Mr. Filli.

- 29 -

[183]
Mr. Filli’s evidence that he was kicked by Mr. Abraha and Mr. Ademnur isnot supported by any other reliable witness. I do not rely on the evidence of Neil Monck.
Mr. Monck testified about circumstances that were demonstrably false: driving a car ratherthan a tow truck; where he had left his tow truck; his route along the Danforth in his car; and,where he parked when he returned to the scene. While these details are not central to hisobservations, his certainty on these issues and the level of detail he provided on these issuesmake it unsafe to rely on any part of his evidence without confirmation by other evidence.
The only part of his evidence that is confirmed by other evidence is that there was a fight andthere was a green sports car in the area of the fight around the time of the fight.

[184]
Mr. Monck told the police that he saw someone get out of the car and go tothe fight in the middle of the road. Mr. Filli and all other witnesses put the fight on and nearthe sidewalk. The only time that participants went to the middle of the road was after thestabbing when Mr. Filli ran out into the road and Mr. Ademnur and Mr. Abraha may havefollowed him. Mr. Filli did not say that any kicking occurred at that point. Mr. Monck, in hisoriginal statement to the police, just said that people were ‘going at it’ and were ‘bundled’.
He did not mention that anyone was on the ground or kicked.

[185]
As Charron J.A. (as she then was) observed in R. v. Miaponoose9 : “…much ofwhat one thinks one saw is really perpetual filling-in…It is impossible for the brain toreceive a total picture of any event. Since perception and memory are selective processes,viewers are inclined to fill in perceived events with other details, a process which enablesthem to create a logical sequence…thus the final recreation of the event in the observer’smind may be quite different from reality.” I find that Mr. Monck has filled in the gaps in hismemory and that while he was trying to be accurate and truthful, his current recollection iswholly unreliable.

[186]
I accept that Mr. Abraha pushed, head-butted and held Mr. Filli. AlthoughMr. Filli said that the head-butt occurred as he got up from the ground and as Mr. Abrahaheld his shirt, I do not accept that Mr. Abraha head-butted him at this point. Mr. Filliexplained the sequence of events at least three times in his testimony before he said thatMr. Abraha head-butted him as he rose from the ground. Mr. Filli told the police in hisstatement that Mr. Abraha head-butted him, but described it happening when Mr. Abraha waspushing him.

[187]
Mr. Filli, in his statement to the police and in his testimony, spoke of beingpushed into traffic. He said that he did not know the intentions of the men. He told the policethat he feared being kidnapped. I find that Mr. Abraha did push Mr. Filli towards the street.
Mr. Abraha was attempting to push Mr. Filli away from Mr. Berhane. While I rejectMr. Abraha’s evidence as to his specific actions in the fight, I accept that his objective in

9

(1996), 30 O.R. (3d) 419 at para. 11

evidence that Mr. Puritch saw no fight just before 3:02 a.m., but saw Mr. Filli running awayand Mr. Berhane on the ground at about 3:05 a.m. There was insufficient time for Mr. Filli tohave been pushed to ground, kicked, held and then pushed into traffic. I reject Mr. Filli’sevidence that he fell to the ground and was kicked by Mr. Abraha and Mr. Ademnur.

- 30 -

[188]
I find therefore that in the second part of the fight Mr. Filli began fightingwith Mr. Berhane. Mr. Berhane punched Mr. Filli and Mr. Filli responded by punching andpushing Mr. Berhane. Mr. Filli could have left. He did not leave, but willingly engaged in thefight. Mr. Filli testified, “I gotta know why I’m getting hit, what’s the reason…I wouldn’tjust leave like that.”

[189]
Mr. Abraha became involved in the fight after it began. He pushed Mr. Filliand head-butted him. Mr. Filli may have fallen to the ground when he was pushed away fromMr. Berhane.

[190]
I find that Mr. Ademnur simply stood by to assist if he was needed. Mr. Fillitold the police that Mr. Ademnur “stood here”. Mr. Filli testified that Mr. Ademnur was notdoing anything but standing nearby at the point that Mr. Filli stabbed Mr. Berhane.

[191]
Mr. Filli did not take out and use his knife until after the pushing and headbutting. He testified that Mr. Abraha held his shirt and he could not leave.

[192]

I find that Mr. Filli could have left the fight.

[193]
Mr. Filli was not overpowered by Mr. Abraha. Mr. Abraha was smaller thanMr. Filli. Mr. Filli testified that he would have no problem dealing with Mr. Abraha alone.
He said, “Maarg by himself can’t do nothing to me.” At the point that Mr. Filli took out hisknife and stabbed Mr. Berhane, Mr. Abraha was holding Mr. Filli and attempting to preventthe continuation of the fight between Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane. At the point that Mr. Fillitook out and used his knife, Mr. Ademnur was doing nothing. He was standing nearby.

[194]
When Mr. Filli took out his knife, Mr. Berhane was the only person who wascontinuing to attempt to hit Mr. Filli. Mr. Berhane was not successful in hitting Mr. Filli orharming him because Mr. Abraha was between the two men.

[195]
Mr. Filli’s explanation for why he stabbed Mr. Berhane in the context of hisdescription of the fight did not make logical sense. Mr. Berhane had not caused any harm toMr. Filli. Even if I had accepted Mr. Filli’s version of events, that he was kicked byMr. Abraha and Mr. Ademnur, Mr. Filli’s explanation for stabbing Mr. Berhane does notmake logical sense. Mr. Filli was facing Mr. Abraha and was being held by him. He did notattempt to break free. He did not leave the area. He did not use his knife on Mr. Abraha.
Instead he reached around Mr. Abraha and stabbed Mr. Berhane.

[196]
Mr. Filli testified that at the time that he stabbed Mr. Berhane, he was scaredthat he would be kidnapped or killed. He said,So much thing was going on in my head you know, so I wasshocked. I was okay with these three people and now they arefighting with me. So I thought like…too much thing was goingon in my mind. I thought they were going to kidnap me. I

becoming involved in the fight was to prevent its continuation. I find that in his testimony,Mr. Abraha minimized the amount of force that he used to accomplish his purpose.

- 31 -

[197]
When asked about his belief that they would kidnap him, Mr. Filli said, “[o]neof the things that was going on in my brain, cause they –they were okay with me and thenthey came and attack me, so too much thing was going on. I was thinking like…what is allthis about, you know? I didn’t do nothing wrong. So these guys are up to somethingdangerous, so I gotta do something before I get killed.”

[198]
I find as a fact that Mr. Filli believed that he was in danger from Mr. Berhane.
Mr. Filli perceived the situation as gravely dangerous. There were, as he described, “manythings” going on in his mind. Eleven days before the fight Mr. Filli told MahmoudAdderahman that he needed a knife and that he believed he was being hunted. Within amonth before that, he told Mr. Yuanes that he needed a gun. Mr. Filli believed that he wasvulnerable and at risk before this altercation. During the altercation he believed that he couldbe kidnapped or killed. I find, based on all of the evidence, that Mr. Filli had a heightenedsense that he was in danger before the commencement of this confrontation. This sense ofvulnerability and sense that he was in danger was a factor in Mr. Filli’s perception of eventsand his response to the confrontation and ensuing altercation.

[199]
Having considered all of the evidence, I accept Mr. Filli’s evidence that, at themoment that he stabbed Mr. Berhane, he believed that he was in danger and acted for thepurpose of defending himself. I accept that he had been assaulted by both Mr. Berhane andMr. Abraha and that he acted subjectively for the purpose of defending himself from a furtherattack that he believed was imminent. Mr. Filli stabbed Mr. Berhane because he believed thatMr. Berhane would kill him or kidnap him and that Mr. Berhane would engage the assistanceof others to do so. Mr. Filli believed that the danger to him came from Mr. Berhane and forthat reason he targeted Mr. Berhane and stabbed him. Mr. Filli’s conduct in the days andweeks leading up to the incident shows that he was concerned about his safety and felt thathe was in danger.

[200]
I therefore conclude that the Crown has not disproven the elements inss. 34(1)(a) or (b).

[201]
Subsection 34(1)(c) requires that the act committed be reasonable in all thecircumstances.

[202]
I have concluded that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt thatthe force used by Mr. Filli was not reasonable in all the circumstances.

[203]
Mr. Filli subjectively believed that he faced the risk of serious harm, killing orkidnapping from Mr. Berhane, but that belief was not objectively reasonable.

[204]
Mr. Filli faced the threat of force from Mr. Berhane and from Mr. Abraha aslong as he remained engaged in the fight with Mr. Berhane. Neither man was armed with anyweapon, Mr. Filli had the option of retreating from the fight at any time followingMr. Berhane’s approach and confrontation. Mr. Filli chose not to retreat. Mr. Filli waspushed forcibly away from Mr. Berhane by Mr. Abraha but continued to try to fight. Mr. Filli

thought they were going to kill me, I thought they…too muchthing was going on at that time.”

- 32 -

[205]
I find that he did so because, as he said, he thought that the three men mightkidnap or kill him and there were too many things going on in his brain. I find that Mr. Filli’sassessment of the nature and level of threat to him was not objectively reasonable. He faced apossible physical assault from Mr. Berhane. He had no reasonable belief that Mr. Berhanewas armed. Mr. Abraha had pushed him forcibly away from the altercation. Mr. Filli was notprevented from retreating. His choice to remain engaged in the fight and to use a weaponagainst unarmed men was not reasonable given the nature of the force that he faced and theoptions that he had to avoid that threat of force. I appreciate that the ability to retreat is notdeterminative of self-defence. It is merely a factor to be considered. However, in thecircumstances of this case, I find the opportunity to retreat to be a significant factor inassessing the reasonableness of Mr. Filli’s act of stabbing Mr. Berhane.

[206]
In reaching this conclusion, I have taken into account the fact thatMr. Berhane was a stranger to Mr. Filli. Mr. Filli did not know Mr. Berhane’s background orpropensity for violence. An unprovoked attack by a stranger is a frightening event and I
accept that Mr. Filli was pushed and hit for no reason by Mr. Berhane who was a stranger tohim. I have also considered the fact that Mr. Berhane was intoxicated and that hisintoxication would have been apparent to Mr. Filli. However, Mr. Abraha and Mr. Ademnurwere known to Mr. Filli. Mr. Ademnur did nothing to threaten Mr. Filli. Mr. Abraha pushedand assaulted Mr. Filli, but in a manner directed at causing Mr. Filli to leave the fight.

[207]
Mr. Filli misapprehended the situation and his misapprehension was notreasonable. He believed that Mr. Berhane was causing Mr. Abraha and Mr. Ademnur to turnon him. He believed it was necessary to stop Mr. Berhane from kidnapping or killing him bystabbing him with the knife. Mr. Filli did not face a threat of kidnapping or death. He faced athreat of being hit and pushed if he remained in the fight. His response to the force that,objectively, he did face was grossly disproportionate. It was unreasonable.

[208]
doubt.

I therefore find that self-defence has been disproven beyond a reasonable

Intent for Murder-Applicable Legal Principles

[209]
Having concluded that self-defence is not available, the stabbing ofMr. Berhane was an unlawful act and the homicide was culpable. The subsection of theCriminal Code relevant to the intent for murder is s. 229(a).

[210]
The intent in s. 229(a)(i) is straightforward: the accused must be shown tohave intended to kill. There are two elements to the mens rea in s. 229(a)(ii): subjectiveintent to cause bodily harm and subjective knowledge that the bodily harm is of such a naturethat it is likely to cause death.

was head-butted by Mr. Abraha but continued to try to engage in the fight. He was held byMr. Abraha to keep him from fighting with Mr. Berhane. Mr. Filli continued to attempt tofight with Mr. Berhane.

[211]
The Supreme Court of Canada addressed the mens rea for murder unders. 229(a)(ii) in R. v. Nygaard,10 and again in R. v. Cooper.11 Cory J., writing for a unanimouscourt in Nygaard, explained the meaning of the intent in s. 229(a)(ii) as follows at pp. 108788: “[t]he essential element is that of intending to cause bodily harm of such a grave andserious nature that the accused knew that it was likely to result in the death of the victim. Theaspect of recklessness is almost an afterthought…”

[212]
accused.12

Intoxication is a relevant consideration in determining the intent of the

Analysis and Conclusion on Intent

[213]
Mr. Filli testified that he did not intend to kill Mr. Berhane. He testified thathe was shocked to hear that Mr. Berhane had died. His reaction in the police statementprovides powerful confirmation of this evidence. Mr. Filli appears genuinely shocked andupset when he accepts that Mr. Berhane has died. Mr. Filli’s evidence that he intended tostrike Mr. Berhane on the arm or shoulder is credible. I have considered the size and type ofknife used by Mr. Filli. This was not a small pocket knife. It was a weapon that was clearlycapable of causing serious harm. I have considered that the wounds to Mr. Berhane werelocated on his back. One wound was about midway down the back and close to the midline.
The location and path of the wounds are consistent with Mr. Filli stabbing Mr. Berhane as heturned to leave the fight. However, the wounds are also consistent with Mr. Berhane turningto protect himself from the knife.

[214]
Both Mr. Filli and Mr. Berhane were moving at the time that Mr. Filli stabbedMr. Berhane. Mr. Filli had to reach past Mr. Abraha to strike Mr. Berhane. Mr. Filli wasintoxicated as a result of his consumption of alcohol and marihuana. I have found thatMr. Filli targeted Mr. Berhane in the fight. I am satisfied that Mr. Filli intended to woundMr. Berhane. Mr. Filli had to have known that by stabbing him he would cause him bodilyharm. Mr. Filli stabbed Mr. Berhane twice because he did not believe that his first attemptwas successful. While I am satisfied that Mr. Filli intentionally caused bodily harm, I am notsatisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Filli intended to cause bodily harm of such a
‘grave and serious nature’ that he knew that it was likely to result in Mr. Berhane’s death.

[215]
I find that the Crown has not proven that Mr. Filli intended to killMr. Berhane or to cause him bodily harm that he knew was likely to kill Mr. Berhane.

10

[1989] 2 S.C.R. 1074

[1993] 1 S.C.R. 146
12
R. v. Daley, 2007 SCC 53, [2007] 3 S.C.R. 523
11

- 33 -

- 34 -

VI

CONCLUSIONS

___________________________
Forestell J.

Released: May 10, 2017

[216]
For these reasons, I find Osama Filli not guilty of the second degree murder ofNahom Berhane, but guilty of manslaughter.

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B E T W E E N:

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
- and OSAMA FILLI

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

Forestell J.

Released: May 10, 2017

CITATION: R. v. Filli, 2017 ONSC 2883
COURT FILE NO.: CR/15/70000/5940000
DATE: 20170510

