ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN :

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
Respondent )
– and –
JAMES PATRIQUIN
Appellant )

Melissa Mandelfor the respondent Her Majesty the Queen

Sonya Shikhmanfor the appellant

HEARD: December 13, 2016

THEN J.:
OVERVIEW

[1]
The appellant was convicted of dangerous driving and over .80 operation of a motorvehicle on July 26, 2016, following a three day trial before a judge of the Ontario Court ofJustice and sentenced to serve 90 days intermittently, prohibited from driving for three years andto a two year term of probation. The appellant appeals the convictions only.

[2]
The sole issue at trial was the identity of the driver. The resolution of that issue, resultingin the convictions, was based upon the assessment by the trial judge of the reliability andcredibility of the arresting police officer who identified the appellant as the driver and thecredibility of the appellant who claimed not to be the driver in accordance with the approachoutlined in the decision of the Supreme Court in R. v. W. D., [1991] 1 S.C.R. 742 as these werethe only two witnesses called at trial.

[3]
The police officer observed a SUV vehicle registered to the appellant driven in adangerous manner on Danforth Avenue almost causing a collision and thereafter racing past hispolice vehicle. The officer engaged the vehicle in a pursuit. The officer who had a clear visual ofthe driver as a result of brief eye contact consisting of a “one second glance” was able to identifythe appellant as the driver based on certain prominent features. The officer caught up to theappellant’s vehicle in approximately 40 seconds and observed the appellant approaching from

CITATION: R. v. Patriquin, 2016 ONSC 2959
COURT FILE NO.: 75/16
DATE: 20170515

the driver’s side of the vehicle while the driver’s door was closing. While the officer wasarresting the appellant the passenger door opened and a male person who did not in any waymatch the features noted by the officer escaped from the scene. The appellant claimed he was notthe driver.

[4]
Generally, the trial judge in her reasons held that she disbelieved the evidence ofappellant, nor did his evidence raise a reasonable doubt. The trial judge indicated thatbelieved the evidence of the officer and that she was satisfied, based on his evidence, thatCrown had proved the essential ingredients of the offences of dangerous driving and overoperation of a motor vehicle beyond a reasonable doubt.

theshethe
.80

[5]
The appellant contends that the trial judge did not appropriately deal with issues raised bythe appellant regarding the reliability and credibility of the officer. More importantly, theappellant submits that a one second glance could not in the circumstances of this case rise to thelevel of proof beyond a reasonable doubt and that in finding otherwise the trial judge erred inprinciple and applied flawed reasoning while misapprehending the significance of thechronology of the identification process.

[6]
The Crown submits that in her detailed and considered reasons the trial judge properlyinstructed herself on the frailties of identification evidence and correctly concluded that therewas ample evidence to support her finding that the appellant was the driver of the motor vehicle.
Moreover, her findings as to the reliability and credibility of the officer and the appellant areentitled to deference. The Crown contends that the trial judge did not misapprehend the materialparts of the evidence dealing with identification leading to a finding of guilt but that essentiallythe appellant seeks to have this court retry this case.
THE BACKGROUND FACTS

[7]
On August 18, 2014, PC WANG at around 8:17 pm was driving to the hospital in relationto a different investigation when he noticed a car make a left turn in a dangerous manner. Theofficer observed a SUV making a left tum onto Danforth Street in Toronto cutting off a taxi andswerving on the road. The driver was then "face to face (in) oncoming traffic in front of me”.

[8]
The officer activated his lights and that automatically activated the in-car camera. As thedriver passed the cruiser the officer pointed his finger at the driver motioning him to pull over.
That command was ignored. The officer's window was down and he believed, as confirmed bythe in-car video, the driver's window was also down. The lighting conditions were good.

[9]
When asked for the first time at trial what the driver looked like at the time he drove pastthe officer the following exchange took place:
Q. And are you able to describe or recall what the driver looked like to you atthat time as he was driving past?

- Page 2 -

A. At that time, just a male. Like I thought it was like some kind of shaved head.
Like darker features, like darker hair kind of thing. That what I remember.
Like kind of square-ish kind of face. But- but the head, the shaved head, very short hair is what I noticed. The most prominent feature that I noticed.
Q. … And what about his clothing? Did you make any notice at that time of hisclothing?
A. That, I don't recall. I think some kind of dark jacket of some kind. But it wasa very fast- like brief flash. We made momentary eye contact. And then, atthat time, I was on my way- by that time, I kind of realized he wasn’t going tostop. So I was already on my way to make my three point turn.
Q. and were you able to see anyone else in the vehicle as it drove past?
A. No, I don’t have time to notice much else.
(emphasis added)

[10] Following this exchange with the Crown the officer referred to his notes and testified thatin addition to the description recounted, the officer noticed that the driver had a beard.

[11] It is common ground that the officer’s notes were not made until after the appellant wasarrested and placed in the police cruiser and that on cross-examination the officer agreed that hisobservation of the driver as they passed each other was a one second glance, a one second eyecontact. The driver then proceeded to speed through a busy street and made another sharp turn inan attempt to get away from the police. When the officer caught up with the vehicleapproximately 40 seconds after he had seen the driver it was stopped in an alley and theappellant was outside of the vehicle on the driver’s side walking towards the police car. Theofficer testified as follows:
As I got down – as I got towards the end of the alleyway, I noticed that the whiteSUV was parked there. I noticed the driver coming – basically I noticed the driverdoor was on its way to closing. And the driver, that I noticed as I – he drove pastme, walking towards – to the back of the SUV. By this time, towards my vehicle.

[12] It is common ground that the officer wrote in his notes that he recognized the appellant asthe driver of the vehicle he had observed 40 seconds earlier.

[13] Is also common ground that his observation that the driver door was closing was notrecorded in his notes and that the in-car video showed only that the appellant was approachingthe police cruiser from the rear driver’s side of the SUV. The officer explained that while he hadomitted referring to the closing of the driver’s door in his notes he nevertheless had a clearrecollection of the event because it was unusual.

- Page 3 -

[14] The officer testified as to the times on the video relevant to his observations andexplained that the in-car video had not captured his observations because of the way his cruiserwas parked and the way in which the in camera was mounted as it was necessary for him to pivothis head in order to make his observations of the appellant.

[15] The appellant was the registered owner of the SUV. This fact was unknown to the officerat the time. The officer testified that around the same time as the appellant approached the officerfrom the driver’s side of the SUV the officer observed the passenger door to open and anotherperson emerged and immediately started running away from the police. That person was neverapprehended although an effort was made to do so. The person exiting from the passenger seatwas described in the officer’s notes as follows: “male, white, stocky, blonde, buzz cut, dark bluet-shirt, light blue jeans coming out of the passenger’s seat.” consistent with the in-car video.

[16] The Crown specifically asked the officer as to whether he had any doubt whether theappropriate person had been arrested based on the officer’s observations and received thefollowing answer:
No I didn’t have any doubt. I mean I had – we made direct eye contact, I meanhim, his features, even his clothing was very different from the passenger, sowasn’t really; any, you know, hesitation on my part who the driver was. Anyquestion.

[17] The police officer testified that when he spoke to the appellant he understood theappellant to be denying that he was the driver of the vehicle and, refusing to name the driver. Theofficer testified he was distracted by the appellant’s talking and that his references to Jesus, theCode, and wise guys didn’t make sense at the time. On cross-examination after reviewing thevideo the officer conceded that there was a significant 18 minute gap in conversation and thatwith the assistance of counsel he came to appreciate the references by the appellant to the Codeand Jesus were meant to explain his refusal to identify the driver and the reference to “wiseguys” was a reference to the third bar frequented by the appellant.

[18] The officer could not remember how he obtained the car keys to the vehicle. The keyswere found by another officer in the alley.

[19]

The appellant testified that he was not the driver but rather that Justin was.

[20] The appellant testified that after completing some errands he decided to go for a walk onthe Danforth, maybe meet a few people and pop in for a drink or two. He claimed he wasn’texactly sure what he was going to do. The appellant parked his vehicle at the Valu-Mart Parkinglot in what he believed to be a sketchy neighbourhood. After the appellant parked his vehicle heimmediately walked to a bar directly across from the parking lot and began to drink heavily.

[21] The appellant went to three bars and had at least 12-13 drinks with a few people. Theappellant subsequently provided two samples of his breath which indicated, according to thetoxicology report, which was not contested, that at the time of driving the appellant’s blood

- Page 4 -

- Page 5 -

[22] At the third bar, Wise Guys, the appellant met Justin and had a few shots with him. Theyleft this bar and arrived at a bar where the appellant had been drinking earlier. The plan was toget the SUV as the appellant did not want to leave it in the area for fear of a break-in. Theappellant asked Justin to drive, as he was in no condition to drive, and Justin did not appear to bedrinking too much. The appellant acknowledged that notwithstanding his own home was nearby,his plan was to have Justin drive to the appellant’s mother’s house in Scarborough as there was afire pit in the background and to continue drinking there.

[23] When they got into the appellant’s vehicle, Justin drove the vehicle out of the parking lottoo quickly and cut off a taxi. The appellant noticed that the police responded and instructedJustin to pull over but Justin ignored his request and sought to evade the police. The appellantbecame furious with Justin’s dangerous driving and when Justin stopped the vehicle in the alleythe appellant testified he walked around to the driver’s side with a view to pulling Justin out ofthe car, but the door was locked. At this point the appellant observed the police cruiser pulling upfrom behind and he started to walk toward the police to let them deal with Justin.

[24] The appellant testified that it was bad judgment on his part to trust Justin with his car.
When asked how Justin was to get home from his mother’s place, he replied that it is typical ofmaritime hospitality to allow persons to spend the night even if he doesn’t know them well or totake a taxi.

[25] The appellant testified that while he was at the driver’s door Justin may have beenmaking his way out of the vehicle by exiting on the passenger’s side. The appellant explainedthat while he was furious with Justin his calm demeanour in immediately approaching the policeofficer is a good thing to do based on past experience and in particular given his criminal recordit is good to be polite when he comes in contact with the police.

[26] The appellant has a criminal record commencing with a youth record in 1996 for offencesincluding possession over $5,000, break and enters, possession of break-in instruments, failing tocomply with probation and assault. The appellant’s adult record began in 2002 and includesconvictions for numerous assaults, fraud under $5,000, mischief under $5,000, uttering threats,numerous convictions for failing to comply with recognizances and undertakings and two priorconvictions for dangerous driving in 2002 and 2010 respectively. The appellant’s driving licensewas reinstated in January, 2013, as a result of the suspension for the dangerous drivingconviction in 2010.

[27] The appellant testified that he always pleads guilty but did not do so on this occasionbecause he was not the driver notwithstanding that he was offered a reasonable plea deal.
ISSUES

[28]

The appellant raises the following issues:

alcohol level would have been between 255 to 300 mgs. of alcohol in 100 mls. of blood. At trialthe appellant conceded that he was too impaired to operate a motor vehicle.

- Page 6 -

2. Did the trial judge err in law in failing to find that the evidence of the police officeridentifying the appellant as driver was unreliable and in failing to appropriately assess theappellant’s credibility and accordingly, in failing to find the Crown had not proved theoffences beyond a reasonable doubt?
ANALYSIS
Issue 1 - Did the trial judge err in law in rejecting the appellant’s evidence?

[29] In accordance with the approach of the Supreme Court in R. v. W.D., supra, the trialjudge extensively reviewed the evidence of the appellant in order to determine whether to acquitthe appellant if she believed his evidence or if his evidence raised a reasonable doubt.

[30] The trial judge fairly found that at trial the appellant answered questions directly and thathe admitted his consumption of a large quantify of alcohol as confirmed by the very highbreathalyzer readings. The trial judge also found that notwithstanding his consumption ofalcohol, his recollection of events appeared to be unaffected as his interactions with police wererecorded by video. Further, he appeared steady on his feet and answered most of the questionsasked by the officers, although some of his answers on the video did not make sense. However,in court there were no obvious inconsistencies between examination in chief and crossexamination and the appellant was consistent throughout in denying that he was the driver.

[31] Nevertheless, the trial judge examined the implausibility of the appellant’s version ofevents and gave extensive reasons for not accepting the evidence of the appellant as follows:

[40] However, the major weakness in Mr. Patriquin's testimony is that in orderto accept his version of events it requires the Court to believe or accept severalpremises that do not make sense. First, Mr. Patriquin says his plan was to park histruck, drink at local bars and hang out with acquaintances he might meet. He saidhe knew that his truck was not safe parked overnight in that particular parking lot.
Yet, Mr. Patriquin did not have a plan, even when he was sober, on how he wasgoing to get his truck home. This for someone, who agreed, highly valued hisability to drive and hence, work, and who knew the grave consequences ofincurring another driving related offence. Even before running into Justin, Mr.Patriquin by his own tally had been to two separate bars and had had a lot todrink. Assuming he did not know he was going to run into Justin at the next bar,how was Mr. Patriquin planning to get his truck home? Yet he did not stopdrinking. Instead, Mr. Patriquin went to a third bar, kept drinking and thenreturned to the previous bar and continued to drink. So the first question the Courtstruggles for an answer is how was he going to get his truck home, but formeeting Justin?

1. Did the trial judge err in law in concluding that she did not believe the appellant’sevidence and that it did not raise a reasonable doubt?

[41] Even if I were to presuppose Mr. Patriquin had a Plan B to get his truckhome, Mr. Patriquin's position is that he trusted Justin to drive his truck, despitenot knowing Justin very well or knowing how much Justin had been drinking. Mr.Patriquin says on the one hand, he knew enough that he could not drive, but onthe other hand, says his drinking contributed to making, in hindsight, a poordecision to let Justin drive.

[42] I suppose it is possible for both positions to be true. However, Mr.Patriquin agrees he knew the situation was grave when he heard the police sirens.
He knew his license had been recently re-instated; he knew from experience thatbeing in this situation would be terrible. So assuming, as he would have this Courtbelieve, that he was in the passenger seat, then it makes little sense for him toleave the sanctity of that position. The video shows, Wang's cruiser's sirens wereon as he turned the corner on Patricia Avenue. Knowing the police were at leastclose, if not directly behind him, it makes no sense for Mr. Patriquin to have leftthe passenger seat.

[43] Mr. Patriquin said he was angry at Justin and wanted to drag him from thecar. So the next unresolved question is why not yell at, scream or punch Justinfrom inside the car?

[44] Mr. Patriquin’s position is that he was intoxicated and making poorchoices. But the video shows that despite Mr. Patriquin's high blood alcoholreadings, he walked normally, responded to questions and asked questions. Someof the first words out of his mouth to P.C. Wang was "I wasn't driving, I didn'tdrive", and later “You didn’t see me driving”. He said those words calmly anddispassionately even though he asks to [sic] court to accept that he was so angryat Justin that he unclipped his seat belt, tore out of the passenger side of the truck,and ran to drag Justin from the driver seat only to find driver's door locked. Yet asthe video shows, at the same time as presumably Mr. Patriquin found the doorlocked, P.C Wang was on scene. Instantly, Mr. Patriquin was calm. He testifiedthat he walked calmly to the officer because he was going to let the police "dealwith the other guy". The video shows P.C. Wang telling the 2nd man to get back inthe truck , and Mr. Patriquin turning around and calmly watching Justin flee. His
"defence" so to speak, just ran away, yet nothing changed in Mr. Patriquin'ssteady and calm demeanour.

[45] Mr. Patriquin's version of events would have the court believe that Justincrawled or climbed over .to the passenger side of the vehicle. In view of the otherdifficulties in Mr. Patriquin's version of events, this too seems highly unlikely.

- Page 7 -

[46] P.C. Wang challenged Mr. Patriquin to tell him that if he wasn't the driver,who was? Mr. Patriquin did not exercise his right to remain silent and defencecounsel does not challenge his voluntariness of his utterances to P.C. Wang oradvance the Charter argument. Mr. Patriquin initially said he could not tell P.C.
Wang the name of the other man, but did say the name "Justin Parker", which theofficer repeated. Later he invoked "Jesus” and referred to a "code" and "wiseguys"; perhaps some reference to the code of silence, it is not clear.

[47] Lastly, to accept the defence's version of events, the court would also haveto find that Justin took the car keys with him and dropped them as he ran. Itmakes little sense that Justin or whoever the individual was, would take the keysout of the ignition from a truck that did not belong to him, and later dispose ofthem.

[48] For those reasons, I do not find Mr. Patriquin's version of events makes alot of sense. I do not accept Mr. Patriquin's testimony on either the first or secondprong of the W. D. test to the extent that it raises a reasonable doubt.

[49] As such, I will review the crown's evidence to determine if I am left with areasonable doubt.

[32] It is axiomatic that an appellate court must show a very high degree of deference to thecredibility findings of the trial judge as the determination of credibility is uniquely the provinceof the trial court given the special position of the trier of fact who has the advantage of seeingand hearing the witnesses testify (See R. v. Aird 2013 ONCA 447 at para. 39; R. v. Burns, [1994]
S.C.J. No. 30 (S.C.C.) at paras. 12-15); Regina v. P.C., [2001] O.J. No. 342 (C.A.) at para. 12; R.
v. W.Y. (1996), 93 OAC 1 (C.A.) at p.5).

[34] As I understand the argument of the appellant, it is conceded that the credibility findingsof the trial judge are owed great deference, nor is it contended that the findings of credibilitywhich the trial judge made were unavailable on the evidence but rather, it is contended that if theCrown or the court had specific concerns regarding the version of events proffered by theappellant that were to undermine the credibility of the applicant those questions should havebeen posed to the appellant pursuant to Browne v. Dunn.

- Page 8 -

[35] I am in full agreement with the respondent that in the circumstances of this case theruling of the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Palmer, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 759 that it isunnecessary to cross-examine a witness on every aspect of his story in order to impeach hiscredit is dispositive of this ground of appeal.

[36] In Palmer McIntyre J. adopted the following passage from the judgment of the BritishColumbia Court of Appeal at pp.781-2:
The second ground of appeal argued was that the trial Judge should have foundthat the evidence of Douglas Palmer raised at least a reasonable doubt of his guilt.
With particular reference to the three occasions to which I have just referred, itwas said that Palmer's evidence was not shaken in cross-examination and it issuggested he was not specifically questioned about one or two of them. Referencewas made to Browne v. Dunn (1894) The Reports 67 and to Rex v. Hart (1932) 23
C.A.R. 202. I respectfully agree with the observation of Lord Morris in the formercase at page 79:
I therefore wish it to be understood that I would not concur in ruling that itwas necessary in order to impeach a witnesses' credit, that you should takehim through the story which he had told, giving him notice by questions thatyou impeached his credit.
In my opinion the effect to be given to the absence or brevity of crossexamination depends upon the circumstances of each case. There can be nogeneral or absolute rule. It is a matter of weight to be decided by the tribunal offact, vide: Sam v. Canadian Pacific Limited (1976) 63 D.L.R. (3d) 294 and casescited there by Robertson, J.A. at 315-7. In the present case Douglas Palmer wascross-examined extensively. It seems to me the circumstances are such that itmust have been foreseen his credit would be attacked if he testified to hisinnocence. In any event, this was made plain when he was cross-examined. Thetrial Judge gave a careful explanation for his acceptance of the story of Ford andrejecting that of Douglas Palmer. I cannot give effect to this ground of appeal.

[37] In this case, as in Palmer, the appellant was cross-examined extensively by the Crownwith respect to his assertion that he was not the driver in the face of the evidence of the policeofficer’s identification of him as the driver. It would have been foreseen that he would be crossexamined with respect to his credibility in asserting he was not the driver. The appellant wascross-examined by the Crown as to his plans for the evening, his location and actions in the alleyas well as the role of Justin and his actions in the alley, as those matters were pertinent to theissue of who was the driver. In my view, it was inappropriate for the trial judge to cross-examinethe appellant, nor was it necessary for the trial judge to take the appellant through his story andto posit her precise concerns with the credibility of his story to the appellant. The trial judge gavea careful explanation for the rejection of the evidence of the appellant and her acceptance of theevidence of the police officer based on the evidence. In my view there was no breach of the rule

- Page 9 -

in Browne v. Dunn. The appellant was not unfairly denied an opportunity to explain a contraryversion of events but rather the trial judge was entitled to find, based on all the evidence, that theversion of events proffered by the appellant was implausible. I would not give effect to thisground of appeal.

[38] It should be noted that on the issue of the credibility of the appellant the trial judge in herreasons outlined the lengthy criminal record of the appellant but did not refer to it in assessingthe credibility of the appellant, notwithstanding convictions for crimes of dishonesty and crimesinvolving disdain for the administration of justice. The trial judge was entitled to use the criminalrecord to assess the credibility of the appellant. That she did not do so inures to the benefit of theappellant.
Issue 2 – Did the trial judge err in law in failing to find that the evidence of the police officeridentifying the appellant as the driver was either unreliable or not credible and accordingly erredin law in failing to find the Crown had not proved the offences beyond a reasonable doubt?

[39] Initially it is convenient to outline the reasons of the trial judge for accepting both thereliability and credibility of the police officer and her consequent finding that the offences hadbeen proved beyond a reasonable doubt. On the issue of reliability she stated the following:

[51] According to P.C. Wang, he saw the driver for no more than one second ashe quickly sped past him. He took mental notes of the driver's appearance andthen began the chase. Based on the time stamp of the in-car video (SUV sped byat 20:17:07 and Mr. Patriquin is seen walking from the driver side at 20:17:47),40 seconds later, P.C. Wang says he saw the same person walking from the driverside of the car. Based on seeing the same face less a minute later and, inparticular, seeing the same dark coloured clothing and the bald/shaved head ofMr. Patriquin, P.C. Wang said he had no doubts Patriquin was the driver of theSUV.

[521] Counsel for Mr. Patriquin correctly notes the frailties of identificationevidence and that police are not endowed with any enhanced powers ofrecollection than the ordinary layperson (R. v. Cranham 2012 ONCA 457 (Ont.
C.A.)). However, in this case, the time between Wang's initial observations andthen seeing Mr. Patriquin outside the driver side, was 40 seconds. P.C. Wangrecorded the descriptions of Mr. Patriquin and the other male, which I havealready summarized. The video confirms that the two men looked very different.

[53] I agree that had the circumstances been different, for example, P.C. Wangidentifying the driver hours or days later, then I would agree a one second glancewould not be enough to establish a foundation for a later identification. But in thiscase P.C. Wang followed the SUV and 40 seconds later saw the same truck andsaw Mr. Patriquin walking from the driver side of the vehicle with a distinctshaved head, beard and dark clothing.

- Page 10 -

[54] The conditions of P.C. Wang making this momentary observations [sic]
were reasonably good: both his window and the driver side window of the SUV
were both rolled down. As the video shows, it was still light outside. Moreover,P.C. Wang having seen the SUV barely avoid a collision with a taxi was alreadyalert when the truck headed his way and he made eye contact with the driver.

[55] Defence counsel submits P.C. Wang may honestly have believed that Mr.Patriquin was the driver, but she argues the court should question the reliability ofhis evidence. In court P.C. Wang testified he saw "the driver's door partially open,on its way to being closed", but the officer did not record that in his notebook; hemerely wrote that the male was walking to the rear of the vehicle from the driverside. P.C. Wang disagreed with counsel who suggested that he added thisimportant detail in court. The officer said he has a memory of the event and is notrequired to note every detail in his notes, which I accept. In this case, P.C. Wangappeared to have no difficulty remembering the incident and where he wasunsure, he said so. For example, P.C. Wang could not remember the details aboutthe missing car keys and recalled something about Mr. Patriquin calling the nextday; asking for them.

[56] As well, there is the in-car camera audio and video recording: P.C. Wangresponsibly turned on the in-car camera system as soon as he saw the white SUV
driving erratically, which activated the recording and recaptured the previous 30
seconds or so. The video and audio equipment remained on during all of hisinteraction with Mr. Patriquin. P.C. Wang testified he saw the door closing eventhough the in-car camera only captured Mr. Patriquin standing outside on thedriver's side door because unlike the dash-mounted camera unit, he could turn hishead.

[57] P.C. Wang seemed like an intelligent. And thoughtful witness: he said thathis adrenalin was running and he needed time to calm down and gather histhoughts once he had Mr. Patriquin safely handcuffed and detained in the backof his police cruiser. In watching the in-car video I accept P.C. Wang's heightenedemotional state was consistent with being the only officer on scene in a dynamicand potentially dangerous situation taking place in an alleyway. It is obviouswhen re-watching the DVD video that P.C. Wang was on high alert when wasoutside of the cruiser and waiting for back-up.

[40]

On the issue of credibility the trial judge stated:

[58] Defence counsel submits P.C. Wang exaggerated his testimony when heoften described Mr. Patriquin as talking non-stop and his words were "disjointed"
and hard to understand. For example, counsel pointed out that between 8:31:25 toapproximately 8:36 pm, Mr. Patriquin does not speak. As well, counsel notedthere was silence for 18 minutes between 8:44 pm and 9:02 pm. In listening to the

- Page 11 -

DVD, as stated, I found the audio very poor and the only person who is heardclearly is P.C. Wang. In listening to the DVD, frankly I could not tell if P.C.
Wang was still inside the car during the above noted times. Other officers cameby and spoke to Mr. Patriquin and P.C. Wang was in and out of the car.

[59] What I can say is that there was a lot of verbal back and forth betweenP.C. Wang and Mr. Patriquin with Mr. Patriquin insisting that he was not thedriver; that he does do things like that; asking why he was detained and could notbe released; why he could not say who the driver was although earlier giving thename “Justin Parker”, and more. P.C. Wang kept the conversation going andwould challenge Mr. Patriquin to tell him who was driving, giving him a recap ofwhat he saw and lecturing Mr. Patriquin on why his driving was dangerous. Whenthe two men were in the car together, they continually bickered. Whether P.C.
Wang found Mr. Patriquin “distracting” was all Mr. Patriquin’s doing or theofficer was part of the problem, is impossible to reconcile. I do, however, agreewith P.C. Wang who said Mr. Patriquin’s references to “Jesus” and a “code” werewithout context and, as he put it, “hard to understand”.

[41] The trial judge stated her conclusions on both issues and found that the Crown hadproved the offences beyond a reasonable doubt:

[60] Overall, while P.C. Wang may have overstated Mr. Patriquin’s incessanttaking and he did not write down that he saw the driver door closing I accept P.C.
Wang’s testimony, which was in large measure was [sic] confirmed by the in-carDVD. I accept his evidence that he made eye contact with the driver and got amomentary glimpse of the driver; enough time to see that the driver had a shavedor bald head, which were features that stood out to him. I also accept that 40
seconds is close enough in time for that memory to be fresh and reliable, so thatwhen P.C. Wang saw Mr. Patriquin walking away from the driver side door, histestimony is truthful and reliable that this was the same man. It also turns out thatthe SUV was Mr. Patriquin's truck, which the officer did not know when hearrested him for dangerous driving. Finally, I have already discussed and givenreasons why I reject Mr. Patriquin's version of events.

[61] Based on all of the evidence, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt thecrown has established James Patriquin was the driver of the SUV and he shall befound guilty. …

[42] The appellant submits that in assessing the adequacy of the findings of the trial judge asto the reliability of the eye witness identification of the appellant by the police officers this courtshould be guided by the observations of Hill J. in R. v. Gordon, [2002] O.J. no. 932 at para. 63:
Our experience with eye-witness identification evidence has taught us to usediscriminating scrutiny for badges of unreliability. Judicially created checklists,

- Page 12 -

based on long experience with the inherent dangers of eye-witness identificationevidence, assist in assessment of the circumstances of a specific identification:
The Queen v. Nikolovski, supra at 409, 412; Mezzo v. The Queen, supra at 129132 per Wilson J. Was the suspect a complete stranger or known to the witness?
Was the opportunity to see the suspect a fleeting glimpse or something moresubstantial? Was the setting in the darkness of night or in well-illuminatedconditions? Did the witness commit the description to writing or report thedescription to the police in a timely way? Is the witness' description general andvague or is there a description of detail including distinct features of the suspectand his or her clothing? Were there intervening circumstances, capable of taintingor contaminating the independence of the identification, between the witness'
initial sighting of the suspect and the rendering of the descriptive account to thepolice or the court? Has the witness described a distinguishing feature of thesuspect not shared by the accused or conversely has the witness' description of thesuspect failed to include mention of a distinctive feature of the accused? Is theeye-witness identification unconfirmed? At least some of these concerns aredeserving of further discussion.

[43] The appellant emphasizes that the initial observation of the officer was a fleeting one andwhile the officer apprehended the appellant 40 seconds later, the description of the appellant andthe other person in the car were not recorded 40 seconds later but sometime after the appellanthad been charged with the offences. The appellant submits that the identification of the appellantas the driver by the police officer must necessarily been influenced by the intervening dealingsbetween the police officer and the appellant.

[44] As I understand the appellant’s position, he does not contest that the trial judge properlyappreciated the frailties of identification evidence nor that given the officer’s encounter with theappellant 40 seconds later, the caution required to accept an identification based on a fleetingglance may be attenuated. However, the appellant contends that because the appellant’sdescription was not recorded in the officer’s notes immediately after his observation of the driverbut only after the officer’s observation of the appellant coming from the rear of the SUV on thedriver’s side, it is entirely possible, even if the officer honestly believed he had seen the appellantdriving the SUV, that the description of the driver in the notes was tainted or contaminated bythe intervening dealings between the appellant and the police officer. It is submitted under thesecircumstances it was unsafe to convict the appellant.

[45] In my view, the submission now made to this court for the first time was not made to thetrial judge, nor was it suggested to the police officer that his identification of the appellant as thedriver and his description of the driver were tainted by his subsequent dealing with the appellant.
In any event, his submission that the convictions are unsafe must be rejected as it is not availableto this court to retry this case.

[46] The reasons of the trial judge make it crystal clear that the conviction is based on thejudge’s finding that she accepted beyond a reasonable doubt that the person who the officer

- Page 13 -

observed driving the SUV was the same person who 40 seconds later he observed advancingtoward him from the driver’s side of the SUV. There was ample evidence to support this finding.
The officer passed directly by the driver of the SUV as the officer drove west and the SUV droveeast. The windows of both vehicles were down as corroborated by the in-car video camera andthe lighting conditions were good. The officer made momentary eye contact with the driverpointing his finger at him to pull over. The officer was in a state of alertness, having observed anear collision, and noted the driver had a distinctive shaved head, squarish face and a dark jacket.
There is no question that 40 seconds later the officer caught up to the same SUV. He testified,and the trial judge accepted his evidence that he instantly recognized the person outside the SUV
as the person driving the SUV based on the distinctive feature of a shaved head, squarish faceand beard. The officer testified and the trial judge accepted that his identification of the appellantwas fortified by the fact that when he arrived at the SUV, the appellant was advancing from thedriver’s side of the SUV in circumstances where the driver’s door was in the process of closingand that the person who emerged from the passenger door had none of the distinctive features ofthe appellant. The trial judge was entitled to consider that the SUV was registered to theappellant, a fact unknown to the officer, as confirmatory of the identification made by the officer.

[47] In my view it is clear that the trial judge accepted the evidence of the police officer thatthe person who he saw driving the SUV was the appellant beyond a reasonable doubt. There wasabundant evidence to support that finding. It was not incumbent upon the trial judge to weighfrailties that were not advanced, as the basis of his acceptance of the identification evidence ofthe police officer is clear and is supportable on all of the evidence (See R. v. Braich, [2002] 1
S.C.R. 9093 at para. 38).

[48] In my view, the reasons of the trial judge do not betray any deficiencies with respect tohis treatment of the reliability of the officer’s identification that would constitute an error in lawor render the verdict unsafe.

[49] Finally, the appellant submits that while the trial judge in his reasons noted that theofficer may have overstated the extent of the appellant’s incessant and incoherent talking andwhile the trial judge acknowledged that the officer’s notes contain no reference to the evidencehe gave at trial as to the closing of the driver’s door as the appellant stood on the driver’s side ofthe SUV, the failure to make specific findings of credibility and to articulate the effect of thosefindings with respect to the officer’s evidence identifying the appellant as the driver constitutesan error of law.

[50] With respect to the omission in the officer’s notes of the evidence of the officer that heobserved the driver’s door closing as the appellant walked toward him from the driver’s side ofthe SUV, it is apparent from the reasons of the trial judge that the trial judge accepted theevidence of the officer that he had a specific memory of this event and that he was not requiredto note every detail in his notes. In my view, given this finding, the trial judge was not requiredto do more.

- Page 14 -

[51] Further, it is apparent from the reasons for judgment that while the trial judge acceptedthat the officer may have overstated the incessant nature of the conversation with the appellant,the trial judge properly weighed both the overstatement and the absence of the closing of thedoor in the officer’s notes in determining that the evidence of the officer that the appellant whowas walking towards him from the driver’s side of the SUV was the same man he had seen 40
seconds earlier driving the SUV on the Danforth. I would not give effect to this ground ofappeal.

[52]

For all these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

THEN J.

RELEASED: May 15, 2017

- Page 15 -

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B ET WE EN :

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
Respondent
– and –

JAMES PATRIQUIN
Appellant

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

THEN J.

CITATION: R. v. Patriquin, 2016 ONSC 2959
COURT FILE NO.: 75/16
DATE: 20170515

- Page 2 -

RELEASED: May 15, 2017

