ONTARIO SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B E T W E E N:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN

- and -

Deanna Passera

) Sam Weinstock, for the Crown
) Marianne Salih, for the Defence
) HEARD: September 21, 2016,November 1, 2016, April 3, 2017

REASONS FOR SENTENCE
Woollcombe J.
A. Overview

[1]

On August 24, 2014, Ms. Passera was arrested on a charge of importing

cocaine.

On August 18, 2016, a jury found her guilty. The sentencing hearing

took place on September 21, 2016. Ms. Passera was remanded to November 1,2016 for the imposition of sentence.

CITATION: R. v. Passera 2017 ONSC 2799
COURT FILE NO.: 1304/15
DATE: 2017 05 11

[2]

On September 27, 2016, while my sentencing decision was under reserve,

the Criminal Code, the provision that caps the maximum credit for pre-sentencingcustody at a rate of 1.5:1. On October 26, 2016, she filed an amended notice ofconstitutional question which expanded the challenge to include s. 719(1) of theCriminal Code, the provision that states that a sentence commences on the dateon which it is imposed, absent another statutory provision providing otherwise. Inher notice, Ms. Passera asked that on November 1, 2016, I fix the schedule forthe constitutional issues.

[3]

Ms. Passera also filed an application for judicial interim release, returnable

on November 1, 2016.

[4]

On November 1, 2016, both parties agreed that as a result of the notices of

constitutional question that had been filed, sentencing should be re-opened. Ms.Salih, on behalf of Ms. Passera, requested and was given until January 31, 2017,a period of three months, to file materials in support of the defence application.
The Crown was given until March 3, 2017 to respond.

The matter was then set

for a one-day oral hearing on April 3, 2017.

[5]

On November 1, 2016, I also heard Ms. Passera’s application for judicial

interim release.

Ms. Passera had been in custody continuously since her arrest.

I dismissed the application.

Ms. Passera filed a notice of constitutional question in respect of s. 719(3.1) of

Ms. Passera then brought an application “in the nature of habeas corpus

[6]

Superior Court of Justice has the inherent jurisdiction to review the detention andgrant bail.

It was her position that the application judge should grant her bail

pending sentencing. That application was heard on February 6, 2017.
On February 21, 2017, Ms. Passera’s habeas corpus application was

[7]

dismissed.

She appealed that decision to the Court of Appeal. The appeal was

heard on March 31, 2017 and dismissed.

The Court subsequently provided its

reasons: 2017 ONCA 308, [2017] O.J. No. 1874.

[8]

On April 3, 2017, I heard submissions of counsel in respect of the

constitutional challenges to ss. 719(3.1) and (1).

I reserved my decision until

May 11, 2017.

[9]

These

reasons

address

both

the

constitutional

application

and the

sentence to be imposed.
B. The Constitutional Issuesi)

[10]

The Positions of the PartiesMs. Passera’s amended notice of constitutional question sets out the

following legal basis for the constitutional question before me:
The effect of s. 719(1) and the cap on enhanced credit created by s. 719(3.1) isto require an offender who is detained pending trial to serve a lengthier sentencethan an identically situated offender who is released pending trial. The law is

with certiorari in aid” seeking various declarations, including that a judge of the

[11]

In essence, I understand Ms. Passera’s position to be that because she

was detained in custody pending sentencing, and because whatever sentence I
impose will not commence until it is imposed, she will inevitably serve longer incustody before being eligible for parole than had she been released on bailpending trial.

She argues, on this basis, that it is unconstitutional to treat

offenders differently based on their ability to obtain judicial interim release andthat this is the effect of these two sections.

She submits that this differential

treatment results in a violation of both ss. 7 and 12 of the Charter.

[12]

As a remedy, Ms. Passera asks that I conclude that s. 719(1) of the

Criminal Code is of no force and effect. In terms of interim relief, she asks me todeem that her sentence commenced on the date of her arrest, and to direct thather parole eligibility and statutory release dates be calculated on that basis.

[13]

It is the Crown position that the punishment faced by Ms. Passera does

not violate s. 12 of the Charter.

Further, the Crown says that the effect of ss.

719(1) and (3.1) does not violate Ms. Passera’s s. 7 right.

The fact that Ms.

Passera’s sentence may not be identical to another offender does not make herpunishment unconstitutional.

therefore overly broad and arbitrary, contrary to s. 7 of the Charter or Rights andFreedoms (the “Charter”). The law also results in grossly disproportionatesentences between similarly situated offenders, and therefore violates section 12
of the Charter. The law cannot be upheld as a reasonable limit under section 1
of the Charter.

[14]

The Relevant LegislationSection 719(1) of the Criminal Code provides:
A sentence commences when it is imposed, except where a relevant enactmentprovides otherwise.

[15]

Section 719(3) and (3.1) of the Criminal Code provide:
(3) In determining the sentence to be imposed on a person convicted of anoffence, a court may take into account any time spent in custody by the personas a result of the offence but the court shall limit any credit for that time to amaximum of one day for each day spent in custody.
(3.1) Despite subsection (3), if the circumstances justify it, the maximum is oneand one-half days for each day spent in custody unless the reason for detainingthe person in custody was stated on the record under subsection 515(9.1) or theperson was detained in custody under subsection 524(4) or (8).

[16]

Once sentenced to serve a period of custody, prisoners are eligible for

release under federal or provincial legislation, depending on the length of theirsentence.

[17]

Under the Corrections and Conditional Release Act, S.C. 1992, c. 20

(“CCRA”), parole is available to federal inmates after serving one third of theirsentence (s. 120(1)).

Statutory release is available after serving two thirds of

their sentence (s. 127(3)).

Offenders serving a sentence of two years or more

are eligible for day parole six months before full parole may be granted, or aftersix months, whichever is greater (s. 119(1)(c)).

ii)

Provincial inmates are credited with earned remission under the Prisons

and Reformatories Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-20.
days per month (s. 6).

This is credited at a rate of 15

In Ontario, under the Ministry of Correctional Services

Act, R.R.O., 1990, c. M.22, Regulation 778, the portion of the term ofimprisonment that an inmate must serve before parole may be granted is onethird of the total term of imprisonment (s. 41(1)).

[19]

The Supreme Court of Canada observed in R. v. Summers, 2014 SCC

26, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 575, at para. 25 that:
In practice, the “vast majority of those serving reformatory sentences arereleased on ‘remission’…at approximately the two-thirds point in their sentence”,and only two to three percent of federal prisoners are not released either by wayof parole or “statutory release” …

iii)

[20]

Section 7 of the CharterSection 7 provides that: “Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security

of the person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance withthe principles of fundamental justice”.

[21]

Ms. Passera acknowledges that because the maximum credit offenders

can receive for pre-trial custody under s. 719(3.1) is 1.5:1, the legislationcompensates offenders for time spent in custody so that those detained pendingsentencing and those released on bail serve the same amount of time beforebeing eligible for statutory release or earned remission (their two thirds date).
But, she asserts that the statutory regime does not compensate fairly when

[18]

determining parole eligibility dates.

This is because she says that the effect of

than those released before they are eligible to apply for day parole and fullparole.

[22]

The s. 7 analysis requires the court to proceed in three stages: R. v.

White, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 417 at para. 38. The first question is whether there is areal or imminent deprivation of life, liberty or security of the person. The secondstage involves the court identifying and defining the relevant principle orprinciples of fundamental justice.
deprivation

has

occurred

in

Finally, the court must determine if the

accordance

with

the

relevant

principles

of

fundamental justice. Where a deprivation of life, liberty or security of the personhas occurred which does not accord with principles of fundamental justice, therewill be a finding of a s. 7 violation.

[23]

There is no question that ss. 719(1) and 719(3.1), in conjunction with the

CCRA, engage an accused’s liberty interest and may deny liberty.

[24]

The next questions engage an analysis of what the relevant principles of

fundamental justice are, and whether any deprivation of liberty is in accordancewith the principles of fundamental justice.

[25]

Three principles of fundamental justice have emerged as central to s. 7

jurisprudence.

Laws that impinge on life, liberty and security of the person must

the legislation is to require those detained in custody to serve longer in custody

not be: first, overbroad; second, arbitrary; or, third, have consequences that are

[2015] 1 S.C.R. 331, at para 72.

[26]

In order to determine both overbreadth and arbitrariness, consideration

must be given to the purposes of ss. 719(1) and 719(3.1).

Understanding of

purpose, for this s. 7 analysis, requires the court to look at: statements ofpurpose in the legislation, if any; the text, context and scheme of the legislation;and

extrinsic

evidence

such

as

legislative

history

and evolution:

R.

v.

Safarzadeh-Markhali, 2016 SCC 14, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 180, at para. 31.

[27]

Ms. Passera’s position is that s. 719(1), which provides that a sentenc e

commences when it is imposed, has no identifiable purpose. This appears to bethe central theme of many of her submissions.

[28]

In my view, the purpose of s. 719(1) cannot and should not be

determined in isolation.

Rather, the legislative scheme created along with it by

Parliament must be considered. As the Supreme Court of Canada recognized atpara. 59 of Summers, the legislature “is presumed to have created a coherent,consistent and harmonious statutory scheme”.

Understanding of that scheme is

critical to assessing the constitutionality of one sub-section of it.

Parliament is

presumed to know the legal context in which it legislates, including the effects ofthe various components of s. 719, which operate together.

grossly disproportionate: Carter v. Canada (Attorney General), 2015 SCC 5,

[29]

In Summers, Karakatsanis J. reviewed in detail the statutory scheme for

Because a sentence begins when it is imposed (s. 719(1)), and the statutoryrules for parole eligibility and early release do not take into account time spent incustody before sentencing, pre-sentence detention almost always needs to becredited at a rate higher than 1:1 in order to ensure that it does not prejudice theoffender.

[30]

In other words, the Supreme Court of Canada recognized that the

practice of awarding credit for time spent in custody flows from the legitimatechoice of Parliament to have sentences commence when they are imposed.
Karakatsanis J. observed that the structure of the Criminal Code reflects thequantitative rationale for enhanced credit (the loss of eligibility for parole andearly release) and the qualitative rationale for enhanced credit (the onerousnature of pre-sentence remand).

She also observed that the structure of s. 719

has resiliency built into it. Indeed, she noted at para. 50, that:
If Parliament were to amend the Corrections and Conditional Release Act, sothat pre-sentence custody counted for the purposes of parole eligibility and earlyrelease, s. 719(3.1) would only be called upon to account for the qualitativeharshness… [Emphasis in original.]

[31]

The Court went on in Summers to review the history of offenders being

credited for pre-sentence custody, explaining that the quantitative rationale forgranting enhanced credit was “to ensure that the offender does not spend moretime behind bars than if he had been released on bail”: para. 23.

The Court

recognized that this objective has, over time, been accomplished in a variety of

crediting pre-sentence custody. She explained at para. 26 that:

manners. Prior to 2009, a practice developed of granting credit for pre-sentenceOne effect of this, of course, was that offenders

sometimes chose to spend time in remand custody in the hopes of receiving ashorter time of imprisonment once they were credited for the time served. 1

[32]

In 2009, Parliament enacted the Truth in Sentencing Act, S.C. 2009, c. 29

(“TISA”).

The Court accepted, at para. 52 of Summers, that it was Parliament’s

intent to restrict the amount of pre-sentence custody credit. Parliament intendedthat the process of granting credit under s. 719 be more transparent and easilyunderstood.

It also intended to remove any incentive for an accused to drag out

time in remand custody.

[33]

In Safarzadeh-Markhali, the Supreme Court again commented on the

purpose of the TISA legislation, reiterating that one broad purpose was toenhance public confidence in the administration of justice.

The Court had said in

Summers that one of the drawbacks to time spent in pre-sentence custody is thatoffenders often do not have access to the educational, training and rehabilitativeprograms that are offered to offenders after sentencing. By reducing the amountof credit for pre-sentencing custody, and thus increasing the time that those

1

For instance, consider two offenders each sentenced to six years in custody two years after arrest. Thefirst, released pending trial, would have to serve two years before being parole eligible, and four yearsbefore statutory release. The second, detained pending trial and credited 2:1 for this time, would becredited for four years, thereby reducing his sentence to two years. He would be parole eligible afterserving a total of 2 years and 243 days (more than the offender released pending trial), but would serve atotal of only 3 years and 122 days (less than the offender who was released pending trial) before statutoryrelease.

detention at a rate of 2:1.

detained

pending

sentence

serve

after

being sentenced,

Parliament was

and before being released, more time to access the many resources that arefrequently not available while in remand custody.

[34]

The Supreme Court of Canada recognized in Summers that s. 719(3.1)

needed to be interpreted in a manner consistent with the “parity principle”. Thismeans that the legislation cannot be interpreted so that a longer sentence isserved by an offender who does not obtain bail than by an otherwise identicaloffender who does obtain bail. The Supreme Court of Canada held in Summersthat the maximum credit of 1.5:1 achieves parity for all offenders at their statutoryrelease date.

[35]

At the same time, the Court also acknowledged, at para. 63 that

enhanced credit of 1.5:1 for pre-sentencing custody does not create “absoluteparity” between offenders who are released pending sentence and those who arenot.

There are, necessarily, some exceptions, which the Court acknowledged

are legitimate.

Indeed, Karakatsanis J. specifically commented at para. 63 that

exceptions to parity and the scope of disparity will vary depending on if and whenoffenders are released.

Exceptions to the parity principle occur because the

enhanced credit regime is predicated on both offenders being released at thetwo-thirds mark of their sentence.

effectively ensuring that those detained in remand would have, post sentencing

The Court concluded, at para. 63 that:
…the scope of disparity will vary, depending on if and when offenders areultimately released. Nonetheless, a rule that creates structural differences insentences, based on criteria irrelevant to sentencing, is inconsistent with theprinciple of parity.

[37]

I understand the Supreme Court of Canada to have accepted in principle

that the regime created through the TISA, under which offenders are creditedwith a maximum of 1.5:1 credit for pre-sentence custody, creates reasonableparity between those who are released pending sentencing and those who aredetained pending sentencing. This is so despite the fact that the parity will not beperfect because some offenders are released after serving one third of theirsentence and others are never released during their sentence.

Notwithstanding

this, the Court accepted the scheme to be one that, from a constitutionalperspective, achieves parity.

[38]

The context of the legislation at issue also means considering it in light of

the CCRA, as this is the legislation that sets out the provisions respecting parole.

[39]

As the Supreme Court of Canada observed in R. v. Zinck, 2003 SCC 6,

[2003] 1 S.C.R. 41, at paras. 19-20:
19.
Determining the date and conditions of parole eligibility is usually theprerogative of an administrative body, the Parole Board, in the discharge of itssupervisory functions over the execution of sentences. Over time, however, thefocus of legislation has shifted. The Corrections and Conditional Release Act (the
"Act") now puts more emphasis than before on the protection of the public andless on pure rehabilitation objectives and concerns. (See for example, ss. 4, 102
and 126; also, H. Dumont, supra, at p. 299.) Nevertheless, the decision-making

[36]

process under the Act remains much different from the judicial determination of afit sentence. It is largely based on the ongoing observation and assessment ofthe personality and behaviour of the offender during his or her incarceration,which focuses on dangerousness and the offender's ability to re-enter thecommunity (H. Dumont, supra, at p. 333). Such a process may extend overseveral years and lead to decisions that are highly attentive to context andbased, at least in part, on what actually happened during the incarceration of theoffender.
20
At the end of this process of observation and review, full parole may begranted. The granting of full parole does not amount to a reduction of the jailsentence. The offender is still serving his or her sentence until the end of theterm. Our Court has defined such a decision as an alteration of the conditionsunder which the sentence is being served (Cunningham v. Canada, [1993] 2
S.C.R. 143 (S.C.C.), at pp. 150-51, per McLachlin J. (as she then was); M.
(C.A.), supra, at para. 61). At the same time, under s. 128 of the Corrections Act,the offender on full parole is entitled to remain at large and is not obliged to livewithin the four walls of the correctional institution. Although the sentence is notover and measures of supervision remain in place, full parole grants an offendera very substantial degree of personal freedom. As mentioned above, this processgenerally used to fall outside the functions of the sentencing courts, which did nothave to concern themselves about parole eligibility, its conditions and itssupervision.

[40]

All federal offenders are subject to not only ss. 719(1) and 719(3.1), but

also to the various applicable provisions of the CCRA, which seeks to protect thepublic and facilitate reintegration of offenders into society after serving theirsentences.

Parliament has also ensured that all federal offenders come under

the purview of the Parole Board by the inclusion of s. 119(1)(c) of the CCRA.
That section provides that no offender in the federal system is eligible for dayparole until after serving at least six months in custody after being sentenced.
Like the TISA, this provision ensures that offenders have an opportunity to takeadvantage of programs that they might not have available to them while incustody on remand, and provides the Parole Board with an opportunity to assessoffenders before their possible release.

[41]

Having reviewed the purposes and context of the scheme of the

arbitrariness, two of the principles of fundamental justice said by Ms. Passera tobe violated by ss. 719(1) and 719(3.1).

I will address the principle of gross

disproportionality when I consider the s. 12 argument.
Overbreadth

[42]

The overbreadth inquiry asks whether the law goes too far by targeting

conduct or people that have no relation to its purpose.

The question is whether

the legislation sweeps within its ambit those unrelated to its objectives.

[43]

As the Supreme Court of Canada explained in R. v. Moriarty, 2015 SCC

55, [2015] 3 S.C.R. 485, a law that has no connection with its objective isfundamentally flawed.

The overbreadth analysis turns on the relationship

between the objective of the law and the effects that flow from the means that thelaw uses to achieve that objective.

As I have already said, the starting point,

therefore, is to look at the proper characterization of Parliament’s purpose inenacting the legislation.

[44]

As set out above, the purpose of the TISA was to restrict credit for pre-

sentence custody while at the same time making the process of granting presentence custody more transparent and easily understood.

The legislation was

legislation created by Parliament, I turn now to the concepts of overbreadth and

also intended to prevent offenders from dragging out remand time in order to

[45]

In Safarzadeh-Markhali, the Supreme Court of Canada held that denying

pre-sentence custody to offenders who are denied bail because of priorconvictions was overly broad because it denied credit to those who did not posea threat to public safety and security.

In other words, one component of the

legislation had the effect of denying pre-sentence custody to those whomParliament had no intention of capturing.

[46]

Similarly, in R. v. Meade, [2016] O.J. No. 5952, Fuerst J. held that the bail

misconduct prong of s. 719(3.1) violated s. 7 because it was overly broad in thatit captured individuals in ways that had nothing to do with public safety andsecurity.

[47]

At issue in this application is not a denial of pre-sentence credit on a

basis that is overbroad.

Ms. Passera accepts that s. 719(3.1), as it is

understood following Summers, does not deny enhanced pre-sentence custodycredit to those who are detained.

Indeed, it allows for all detained offenders to

be granted enhanced credit at a rate of 1.5:1.

This is done in order to

compensate all offenders for the qualitative and quantitative effects of servingpre-sentence custody.

Because these offenders do not, by virtue of s. 719(1),

begin serving their sentences until after serving some period of time in custody,

reduce the time they ultimately spent in custody.

they are all eligible, on the same, identifiable basis, to receive not only credit for

already described.

[48]

Ms. Passera concedes in her factum that, standing alone, s. 719(3.1) is

not overly broad because it applies in the same manner to all offenders whoserve time in custody pre-sentencing. I agree.

[49]

Where I part company with Ms. Passera is her suggestion that the

legislation is overly broad and in violation of s. 7 because its effect is to create asystem where those detained have longer before being parole eligible than thosereleased pending sentencing.

[50]

I do not see the law as being so broad as to capture conduct that bears

no relation to its purpose.

Its purpose is to address how much credit offenders

denied bail pending sentencing should receive for that time in custody in amanner that is transparent, easily explained, and clear to everyone. Its purposeis also to account for the prejudicial circumstances of remand custody byproviding for enhanced credit to account for loss of eligibility for parole and earlyrelease and for the harshness of conditions in remand.

[51]

S. 719(3.1) accomplishes these objectives in the same manner for all

offenders who are detained pending sentencing.

Indeed, the legislation, as it is

now understood in light of Summers, ensures that the time spent in custody until

the time in pre-sentence custody, but also the enhanced compensating credit

statutory release is identical for those detained pending sentencing and those

[52]

In Cunningham v. Canada, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 143, McLachlin J., as she

then was, considered a change in the Parole Act, R.S.C. 1985, c.P-2, that hadthe effect of denying release for an offender who had anticipated being releasedon his presumptive release date until his warrant expiry date.

While holding that

the offender had suffered a deprivation of liberty, the Court held that theamendment that eliminated automatic release on mandatory supervision did notviolate the principles of fundamental justice. The Court held, at para. 19, that:
A change in the form in which a sentence is served, whether it be favourable orunfavourable to the prisoner, is not, in itself, contrary to any principle offundamental justice. Indeed, our system of justice has always permittedcorrectional authorities to made appropriate changes in how a sentence isserved, whether the changes relate to place, conditions, training facilities, ortreatment. Many changes in the conditions under which sentences are servedoccur on an administrative basis in response to the prisoner’s immediate needsor behaviour. Other changes are more general. From time to time, for example,new approaches in correctional law are introduced by legislation or regulation.
These initiatives change the manner in which some of the prisoners in thesystem serve their sentences.

[53]

I take from this that there is no necessary violation of the principles of

fundamental justice inherent in a scheme that changes the form or conditionsunder which a sentence is served.

[54]

In my view, there is nothing overbroad about the manner in which ss.

719(1) and 719(3.1) operate.

Parliament has chosen to create perfect parity

between offenders detained and those released pending trial in terms of

released.

custodial time that must be served before statutory release.

Parliament is

lengthen the time a detained person would serve before being parole eligible, ascompared with a released offender.

The Supreme Court of Canada has

recognized that parity does not necessitate absolute parity, and that changes tothe conditions in which a sentence is served does not necessarily violate aprinciple of fundamental justice.

I cannot accept that the impugned legislation is

overbroad and captures those Parliament had no intention of capturing.
Arbitrariness

[55]

In Carter, the Supreme Court of Canada explained, at para. 83, that:
The principle of fundamental justice that forbids arbitrariness targets the situationwhere there is no rational connection between the object of the law and the limitit imposes on life, liberty and security of the person…An arbitrary law is one thatis not capable of fulfilling its objectives. It exacts a constitutional price in terms ofrights, without furthering the public good that is said to be the object of the law…

[56]

Arbitrariness examines whether there is a rational connection between

the purpose of the law and the limits it imposes on s. 7 interests.

In the context

of this case, the question is whether the limit on credit for pre-sentencing custodyimposed by the legislation is rationally connected to the objective of thelegislation, which is to create a transparent scheme that fairly credits offendersdenied bail for the time they spend in pre-sentence custody.

presumed to have known, when it enacted the TISA, that one of its effects was to

[57]

In my view, there is nothing arbitrary about the scheme, when considered

objectives that were identified by the Court in Summers.

[58]

I acknowledge that one of the effects of the legislation may be that those

denied bail will serve longer in custody awaiting parole eligibility than those whoare released.

One of the justifications for this, in my view, becomes apparent

when the Criminal Code provisions are considered in conjunction with the CCRA.

[59]

In particular, I observe that s.119(1)(c) requires all federal offenders to

serve a minimum of six months in custody after being sentenced before beingeligible for day parole. I take from this that Parliament has chosen to ensure thatall offenders, post sentencing, have access to the sorts of programs andtreatment that are often not available when they are in remand facilities.

It has

also chosen to ensure that a proper risk assessment may take place by theParole Board before an offender may be released on parole.

I accept the

Crown’s position that Parliament’s concerns about public safety and thereintegration into society of offenders is a proper justification for this legislation,and is certainly a justification recognized by the Supreme Court of Canada inSummers.

[60]

A similar justification supports the different effect on the timing for parole

eligibility between those detained pending trial and those released.

As I have

as a whole. I find that the legislation is a rational way to accomplish the statutory

noted already, Parliament is presumed to have known that the effect of the TISA

being eligible for parole.

This delay is not arbitrary when it is viewed in light of

the important objectives of ensuring that, before offenders are considered forparole, they are able to partake in post-sentencing programs and appropriate riskassessments may be completed.

[61]

I do not accept Ms. Passera’s position that the effect of the impugned

legislation is arbitrary.
Gross disproportionality

[62]

Proportionality in the sentencing process is not a principle of fundamental

justice (Safarzadeh-Markhali at para. 21).

I have considered the issue of

whether the legislation at issue gives rise to a situation that is grosslydisproportionate in my s. 12 analysis, and conclude that the effect of theimpugned legislation is not to create a grossly disproportionate sentence.
Conclusion on s. 7

[63]

In my view, the impugned sections of the Criminal Code do not deprive

life, liberty or security of the person in a manner inconsistent with the principles offundamental justice.

[64]

Ms. Passera suggests that the British, Australian and New Zealand

models, which she says “deem” offenders to be serving sentences for any period

was to lengthen the time offenders denied bail would serve in custody prior to

served in custody, are fairer.

At one point during her submissions, she invited

719(1) in a similar manner.

[65]

In my view, Parliament has enacted a clear, coherent, comprehensive

regime that does not violate s. 7 of the Charter. Any deprivation of life, liberty orsecurity of the person is in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.
In the absence of a finding that there has been a Charter violation, it is not for thecourt to say whether another legislative regime would be better. That is the roleof Parliament.

I decline to comment on the various pros and cons of having a

sentence run from the date of detention.

[66]

I observe, however, that were I to strike down s. 719(1) and declare that

sentences run from the date of detention, the ramifications may well be broaderthan counsel canvassed with me.

In fact, given the need to compensate for the

qualitative impact of pre-sentence custody, and the ability to credit offenders at arate of 1.5:1 for this period, one effect might be that those detained in custodypending sentence would serve less time before statutory release than thosereleased.2 I say this only to point out that the issue, which is one for Parliament,

2

For example, an offender denied bail who served two years before sentencing, could receive threeyears of credit towards his sentence in order to account for the qualitative impact of pre-sentencecustody. Were a six year sentence imposed, this offender would have served three years and wouldhave only one more year to serve before statutory release. The offender would then serve a total of threeyears before statutory release. The offender who was released pending trial and received a six yearsentence would have to serve four years before statutory release.

me to rely on the legislation from these other jurisdictions and to re-write s.

is more complex than Ms. Passera suggests, and the remedy that she suggests

[67]
iv)

[68]

Having found no violation of s. 7, I decline to conduct a s. 1 analysis.
Section 12 of the CharterSection 12 of the Charter provides that everyone has the right not to be

subjected to any cruel or unusual punishment. The question is whether thepunishment that is to be imposed on Ms. Passera, in her case or when applied toa reasonable hypothetical offender, violates this guarantee. In order to violate s.
12, a sentence must be “grossly disproportionate to the punishment that isappropriate, having regard to the nature of the offence and the circumstances ofthe offender: R v. Nur, 2015 SCC 15, [2015] 1 S.C.R. 773, R. v. Lloyd, 2016 SCC
13, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 130, at para. 22, R. v. Smith, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 1045.

[69]

As I understand the position of Ms. Passera, she takes no issue that a

sentence in the R. v. Cunningham (1996), 27 O.R. (3d) 786 (C.A.) range (as setout below) is not grossly disproportionate.

Rather, she argues that despite

crediting her for pre-sentence custody on a 1.5:1 basis, the amount of time shewill have to serve post sentence, when compared to that which she would servehad she been released on bail, makes any punishment imposed on her grosslydisproportionate.

creates the fair result has its own challenges and limitations.

[70]

An example illustrates her position as I understand it. She says that were

(2191 days), and then to credit her for the time she has now spent in custody
(992 days) at a rate of 1.5:1 (1488 days), her sentence would be 703 days. Shesays that she will be required to serve a minimum of one third of this, or 234 daysmore, before being eligible for parole.

In total, therefore, she will serve the 992

plus 234 or 1226 days before being parole eligible. This is three years and 131
days.

[71]

By comparison, she says that had she been released in custody following

her arrest, and subsequently sentenced to six years, she would have served aminimum of two years before being eligible for release on parole. She says thatthe

additional

one

year

and

131

days

makes

her

sentence

grossly

disproportionate.

[72]

Of course, when a comparison is done with the time that Ms. Passera

would serve in custody before having served two thirds of her sentence, theresult is interesting. If Ms. Passera were to serve two thirds of the remaining 703
days, she would serve an additional 469 days and a total of 1460 days.

This

would be four years. By comparison, had she been released from custody, andthen had to serve two thirds of a six year sentence, she would have to serve fouryears, or the identical amount of time.

I to impose a sentence at the bottom end of the Cunningham range of 6 years

While she may be a good candidate for parole, I note that no offender is

guaranteed parole at the one third mark of his or her sentence.
course, a matter for the Parole Board.

That is, of

All the one third time means is that an

offender may apply for parole.

[74]

I accept that the effect of s. 719(3.1) and s. 719(1) is that there will be a

difference in the amount of time that will be served in custody prior to paroleeligibility between an offender who is released pending trial and an offender whois not.

In Schedule “C” to her factum, counsel for Ms. Passera sets out the

different lengths of time before being parole eligible and suggests that the longerthe period of pre-trial custody, the bigger the discrepancy becomes between thetime before parole eligibility for the offender who is released and the offenderwho is detained.

[75]

For instance, for a six year sentence, an offender detained for six months

before sentencing would have to serve 27 months before being parole eligible.
An offender who is released would only have to spend 24 months.

I did not

understand counsel to suggest that the three months of difference would amountto a grossly disproportionate sentence.

[76]

However, after an offender facing a six year sentence was detained for

24 months before sentence, he or she would have to serve 36 months total

[73]

before being eligible for full parole.

By contrast, the offender who is released

[77]

The Supreme Court of Canada has set a “high bar” for what constitutes

cruel and unusual punishment.

All of the s. 12 jurisprudence that counsel have

referred to arise in the context of challenges to mandatory minimum sentences.

[78]
or

The Supreme Court of Canada has not been entirely clear about whethernot time spent in custody

before sentencing is properly considered

“punishment” for the purposes of a s. 12 argument.

[79]

There are passages in the jurisprudence that would suggest that pre-

sentence custody is deemed to be punishment following conviction. As Arbour J.
observed in R. v. Wust, 2000 SCC 18, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 455, at para. 41:
…while pre-trial detention is not intended as punishment when it is imposed, it is,in effect, deemed part of the punishment following the offender’s conviction, byoperation of s. 719(3). The effect of deeming such detention punishment is notunlike the determination, discussed earlier in these reasons, that time spentlawfully at large while on parole is considered nonetheless a continuation of theoffender’s sentence of incarceration.

[80]

Similarly, the Supreme Court of Canada said at para. 20 of its decision in

Zinck that the granting of full parole does not amount to a reduction in sentence.
An offender who is granted parole is still serving his or her sentence. The Courtalso said that the parole process is generally one that falls outside of the functionof the sentencing court.

would have to serve only 24 months before being parole eligible.

[81]

Further, I note that in Whaling v. Canada (Attorney General), 2014 SCC

Generally speaking, offenders have constitutionally protected expectations as tothe duration, but not the conditions, of their sentences. Various changes in themanagement of an offender’s parole are not punitive, even though they mayengage the offender’s liberty interest by marginally increasing the likelihood ofadditional incarceration…

[82]

Assuming, for the sake of argument, that a delay in parole eligibility for an

offender detained pending sentencing, as compared to an offender releasedpending sentencing, is punishment that is amenable to a s. 12 analysis, I cannotconclude that the fact that Ms. Passera will spend longer in custody before beingparole

eligible

results

in

the

imposition

of

a

sentence that is grossly

disproportionate and in violation of s. 12 of the Charter.

Whatever discrepancy

results from the manner in which parole eligibility is calculated does not, in myview, lead to the imposition of a sentence for a detained offender that is soexcessive as to outrage standards of decency and be “abhorrent or intoler able”
to society.

It is noteworthy that what is being considered is eligibility for parole,

and not necessarily release on parole.

[83]

It is significant, as well, that in all of the examples provided, there is

perfect parity created between detained and released offenders at the two-thirdstime.

When offenders are released from custody on parole, they continue to

serve the sentences that have been imposed, albeit under different conditions.

20, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 392, Wagner J. said the following at para. 57:

[84]

I accept that Ms. Passera, who has been detained since her arrest, will

released.

This results from a number of factors, including the statutory regime,

the length of time that it took for this case to get to trial, and from delay that iscompletely of her making.

[85]

In terms of delay that she has caused, it cannot be forgotten that had Ms.

Passera received a six year sentence on November 1, 2016, the date scheduledfor the imposition of sentence prior to her constitutional challenge, she wouldhave been credited for the 800 days of pre-sentence custody, and received creditof 1200 days.

This would have been deducted from the six years (2191 days)

and resulted in 991 days remaining.

She would have had to serve one third of

this (a 330 further days) before being parole eligible. In other words, she wouldhave served 1130 days in total before being parole eligible.

As set out above at

paragraph 70, were she to receive the same sentence today, she will have toserve 1226 days before being parole eligible.

This analysis demonstrates that

her decision to delay her sentencing will have resulted in her serving an extra 96
days before being parole eligible.

[86]

This example highlights the fact that there are a number of factors in play

that affect how much time is served in custody post sentencing before anoffender is parole eligible.

It used to be that delays by an offender in being

serve a longer period of time prior to being parole eligible than had she been

The scheme created by

Parliament through the TISA creates perfect parity for statutory release.

While

the parity for parole eligibility is not perfect, I cannot find that this results in agrossly disproportionate sentence for Ms. Passera or the reasonable hypotheticaloffender.

C. The Appropriate Sentence

[87]

Having

dismissed

the

constitutional

argument,

I

turn now to the

appropriate sentence to be imposed on Ms. Passera.
i)

Facts of the Offence

[88]

I will briefly summarize the facts of the offence.

[89]

Ms. Passera was arrested at Pearson International Airport on August

24, 2014 upon her return flight from a one-week trip to St. Lucia. Concealed inher suitcase was 1,994 grams of cocaine. It was 79 percent pure and was worthbetween $80,000 and $160,000 Canadian, depending on how it was sold.

[90]

The only issue for the jury was whether Ms. Passera knew that there was

cocaine concealed in her luggage.

She testified that she did not know and

offered an explanation as to how the cocaine could have been concealed by thecousin of her boyfriend/pimp, a person she testified had access to her hotel roomin St Lucia.

sentenced resulted in overcompensation for custody.

[91]

Implicit in the jury’s verdict is that they rejected Ms. Passera’s evidence

[92]

I do not need to make a finding as to how the cocaine ended up being

concealed in Ms. Passera’s suitcase.

I accept that Ms. Passera was not the

mastermind behind this importation and did not have a leadership role inplanning the importation or procuring of the drugs. I accept that she was not theperson who carefully hid the drugs in her suitcase.

I have no doubt that there

were others involved who, from the manner in which the cocaine was concealed,likely had experience in this sort of activity. Ms. Passera’s role in the importationwas that of a willing courier who knew that there were drugs hidden in hersuitcase.
ii)

[93]

Facts Relating to the OffenderMs. Passera was born on May 6, 1991.

She was 23 at the time of the

offence. She is now 26 years old.

[94]

Ms. Passera testified at trial and provided significant evidence about her

background and upbringing.

She was raised in Bradford, Ontario.

Her parents

separated when she was young and she lived with her father, whom shedescribed as emotionally abusive.
insecure.

She was bullied about her weight and was

She moved in with her mother at the age of 16 and graduated from

high school. After graduation, she began a message therapy program at Humber

as to her knowledge of the concealed cocaine.

College in Toronto, but dropped out when her mother faced significant health

[95]

Following disputes with her mother’s boyfriend, she was effectively kicked

out of that home and moved to Toronto.

Ms. Passera’s time in Toronto proved

challenging.

[96]

Initially, she supported herself through Ontario Works. She then obtained

a job at Tim Horton’s.

She testified about having two relationships in which her

boyfriends cheated on her. She moved in and out of Toronto a couple of times,struggling to find employment and supporting herself through Ontario Works. It isclear that she was plagued by a lack of confidence and low self-esteem.

[97]

At one point, Ms. Passera resumed a relationship with a boyfriend who

had previously cheated on her.

She testified that he pressured her into working

as a prostitute and that he was her pimp. She said that it was he who organized,with his cousin, for her to go to St. Lucia. There, she expected to both have avacation and to work as a prostitute.

[98]

Since her arrest on August 24, 2014, Ms. Passera has been in custody at

Vanier Centre for Women. She has used her time in custody quite productively.
I have been provided with numerous certificates and letters about the programsin which she has participated.

These include religious programs, programs for

challenges.

survivors of sexual violence, programs for substance abuse, and numerous life

[99]

In addition, Ms. Passera has taken advantage of the opportunities offered

at Vanier for counselling.

She engaged in one-on-one therapy between

November 2014 and April 2015 in which she sought to address a variety ofissues

including

coping with stress,

healthy

relationships,

expressing her

emotions, grief, her romantic relationships, her relationships with her family andthe stress of the court proceedings.

[100]

When she spoke at the sentencing hearing in September 2016, Ms.

Passera expressed that she feels that she has taken advantage of the programsand courses offered at Vanier and has learned skills that will enable her to be abetter person. She has reflected on the decisions she has made in the past andfeels that, when released, she will be able to resume her education and therelationships with her family members.

[101]
Passera.

I have been provided with character reference letters in support of Ms.These letters indicate that those who know and love Ms. Passera

acknowledge that she made a terrible decision, but suggest that she has workedhard on her own rehabilitation while in custody and that she is sorry for what shehas done. It is clear to me that she will have significant support from family andfriends when she is released.

skills programs.

[102]

I did not hear from Ms. Passera herself any acknowledgement of error

there is no doubt that she has worked hard on her own rehabilitation, I have notheard from her an indication that she appreciates the serious nature of heroffence or the harm that it causes to the community.

iii)

[103]

Impact on the Victim and/or CommunityLittle needs to be said about the terrible impact of drug importation on

the victims who use the drugs and on the communities into which drugs areimported and then distributed.
iv)

[104]

The Relevant Legal PrinciplesPursuant to s. 6(3)(a.1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act,

S.C. 1996, c. 19, the offence carries a mandatory minimum sentence of twoyears.

[105]

Section 718 of the Criminal Code sets out the following purpose and

objectives of sentencing:
718 The fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and tocontribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and themaintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctionsthat have one or more of the following objectives:
(a) to denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or to thecommunity that is caused by unlawful conduct;

on her part, or any expression that she was sorry for what she was done. While

(b) to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences;
(c) to separate offenders from society, where necessary;

(e) to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community;and
(f) to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, andacknowledgment of the harm done to victims or to the community.

[106]

Further, s. 718.1 of the Criminal Code provides that:
718.1 A sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and thedegree of responsibility of the offender.

[107]

Section 10 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act provides the

following with respect to the purpose of sentencing:
10 (1) Without restricting the generality of the Criminal Code, the fundamentalpurpose of any sentence for an offence under this Part is to contribute to therespect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society whileencouraging rehabilitation, and treatment in appropriate circumstances, ofoffenders and acknowledging the harm done to victims and to the community.

[108]

The Court of Appeal has set a range of six to eight years in the

penitentiary as the appropriate sentence for first time couriers who importmultiple kilograms of cocaine into Canada for personal gain: R v. Cunningham atparas. 19-20. This range has been affirmed multiple times including, mostrecently, in R. v. Jackman, 2016 ONCA 121, 334 C.C.C. (3d) 340 at paras. 5556.

[109]

It is clear from the Court of Appeal’s comments in R. v. Cunningham

and R. v. Hamilton (2004), 186 C.C.C. (3d) 129 (Ont. C.A.) that the common or

(d) to assist in rehabilitating offenders;

usual mitigating factors do not permit a court to impose a sentence below the

sympathetic.

In order to justify the imposition of a sentence below the usual

range, however, there must be “exceptional or extenuating circumstances”: R. v.
A.B. (2004), 27 C.R. (6th) 178 (Ont.S.Ct.) at paras. 20-21.

v)

[110]

The Positions of the Parties on SentenceThe Crown seeks a sentence of six and a half year, less credit for pre-

sentence custody.

In addition, he seeks ancillary orders including a weapons

prohibition, a forfeiture order and a DNA order.

He acknowledges that Ms.

Passera should be credited for pre-sentence custody at a rate of 1.5:1. He alsosays that she should receive three months credit for the period of time spent inpre-sentence lock-down at Vanier.

[111]

The defence seeks a sentence of five years less credit for pre-sentence

custody, credited on a 1.5:1 basis.

It is the defence position that the mitigating

circumstances in this case warrant a reduction of sentence below the usual six toeight year range. The defence relies, in particular, on the fact that Ms. Passerahas been on “lock-down” in Vanier for considerable periods of her time incustody.

The defence concedes that the ancillary orders that are sought should

be granted.

usual range. Most drug couriers are in difficult circumstances and are somewhat

vi)

Analysis

[112]

Ms. Passera has provided an affidavit in which she sets out the period

for which she has been under lock-down while at Vanier.

I understand her

affidavit evidence to set out the number of hours of time that she was required tospend in her cell that go beyond the number of hours set out in the rules for herunit.

For instance, she says that the rules provide that inmates are to be out of

their cells between 7:30 and 11:30 a.m. They are to be in their cells from 11:30
a.m. to 1:30 p.m. for lunch and are to be out between 1:30 and 4:30 p.m. Theythen return to their cells from 4:30 to 6:00 p.m. and are to be out between 6:00
and 9:00 p.m. These rules were posted in her unit.

[113]

Ms. Passera says that between August 2014 and December 2015,

these rules were not followed.

Routinely, she says that inmates were kept in

their cells for an extra half hour at lunch (until 2:00 pm), for an extra hour and ahalf over dinner (from 4:00 to 7:00 p.m.) and were locked up at night half an hourearly (at 8:30 p.m.). She says that this resulted, regularly, in an extra three hoursof daily lock-down.

[114]

In addition, Ms. Passera kept a journal of lock-down times.

She

recorded these in the first column of the chart that was entered as Exhibit 2 onsentencing.

In that chart, as I understand the position of the defence, the total

How does the lock-down affect the sentence to be imposed?

number of hours of lock-down are calculated using the three hours of usual extra

additional lock-down time calculated from Ms. Passera’s journal.

[115]

On September 21, 2016, her affidavit evidence was that she had been

on lock-down for a total of 1,484 hours. This was said to amount to 148.44 days.
Ms. Passera initially sought credit on a 2:1 basis for this time and so sought areduction in sentence of 296 days.

[116]

When she returned before me on April 1, 2017, a new affidavit suggests

that she has been on lock-down for 184 additional hours between, September21, 2016 and April 1, 2017.
1668.

The total number of lock-down hours, therefore, is

As I understand Ms. Passera’s position, she would say that the total lock-

down time amounts to 167 days and that she should be credited at a rate of 2:1.
With the additional time since then, she seeks credit of 334 days, just short of ayear.

[117]

On the sentencing hearing, Marianne Mueller, the Deputy Supervisor of

Programs at Vanier, testified.

She testified that lock-downs are usually as a

result of staffing issues.

[118]

I understand that the Crown accepts the Lockdown Hours Chart

prepared by the defence from Ms. Passera’s affidavit evidence.

time in cells between August 24, 2014 and December 31, 2015 and the

[119]

Section 718.2(a) of the Criminal Code provides that a sentence may be

[120]

I accept that over the period of time that she has been in custody, Ms.

Passera has been confined in her cell for significantly longer periods than therules of the unit set out. I also accept that the reason for these additional periodsof confinement in her cell have been due to staff shortages in the facility.

[121]

The phrase “lock-down” must be used with some care.

“Lock-down”

can mean different things in different situations. In this case, Ms. Passera uses itto refer to any period of time in which she was confined to her cell when the rulesof the unit suggested that she should have been permitted out of her cell. This isa very different use of the term than in some of the other cases in which credit forlock-down has been considered.

[122]

In R. v. Doyle, 2015 ONCJ 492, [2016] O.J. No 4543, Green J.

considered whether to reduce an offender’s sentence for what he viewed as
“harsh treatment” in pre-sentence custody.
pre-sentence custody.

The offender spent eleven months in

For at least 70 of these days, and likely more than that,

he was under lock-down for 24 hours a day.

This lock-down meant that the

accused was confined to his cell for 24 hours a day with brief exceptions (notalways respected) for showers and visits (limited to 20 minutes twice a week). Inthose circumstances, Justice Green found the circumstances of the detention

reduced to account for any mitigating circumstance.

harsh and credited the offender with 1.5 days for each day of his pre-sentencing

[123]

The issue of credit for lock-down was also considered Justice O’Marra

in R. v. Bedward, 2016 ONSC 939, [2016] O.J. No. 855.

In that case, the

evidence before O’Marra J. was that the offender had been in lock-down for 225
days, although he agreed that some of those had been less than full days.

A

sergeant from the detention centre at which the offender had spent his presentencing custody testified that he had been under lock-down for 128 days.
During those periods of lock-down, prisoners were permitted to be outside oftheir cells for no more than 20 minutes per day.
only once every three days.

They were permitted showers

Family visits were not accommodated.

Prisoners

were deprived of amenities. Programs may have been interrupted.

[124]

In considering the impact of this lockdown, O’Marra J. held, at

paras. 22:
The fact that an inmate has experienced lockdowns certainly does not leadautomatically to any additional mitigation of their ultimate sentence. However, aprolonged lockdown that is unrelated to the misconduct of the accused before thecourt may constitute harsh conditions that merit some mitigation of sentence. A
lockdown is not the norm within the institution and it should not be viewed assuch. When a lockdown occurs, the inmate is cut off from contact with theoutside world, including family, friends and counsel.

[125]

He concluded that the offender should be awarded credit of three

months for the lock-down periods.

custody.

[126]

In R. v. Shah, 2016 ONSC 2651, [2016] O.J. No. 2179, Quigley J.

account for harsh conditions in custody pre-trial. He spent 190 days under lockdown due to staff shortages or labour disputes.

Quigley J. observed that the

offender was deprived of exercise time and exposure to sunlight and was
“effectively kept in his cell without relief”. After reviewing the decisions in Doyleand Bedward, Quigley J. granted the offender an additional 30 days of credit forthe lock-down circumstances.

[127]

In R. v. DeSousa, 2016 ONSC 5493, [2016] O.J. No. 4543, Gilmore J.

considered the offender’s request for credit for lock-down hours. In that case, theevidence was that inmates were normally released from their cells for eight hoursper day.

She characterized lock-down time as a deprivation of this eight hour

period or some part of it. When a unit is in lock-down, prisoners may lose accessto phones and showers and may lose yard time.
respecting the offender’s lock-down times.

There were two reports

The defence position was that in the

first period, there had been 1490 hours of lock-down which, when divided byeight hours per day, was said to amount to six months of lock-down.
second period, there were an additional three months of credit.

In the

In total, the

defence sought credit of nine months for these two periods. The Crown positionwas that the credit should be about 60 days.

considered the offender’s argument that his sentence should be reduced to

[128]

After reviewing the decisions in Doyle, Bedward and Shah, Gilmore J.

in custody.

She held, at para. 68, that simply converting the number of lock-

down hours into days of credit is not a reasonable way of determining credit.
She credited the accused with 90 days for the lock-down.

[129]

During the first period of her incarceration, from August 24, 2014 until

early December 2015, Ms. Passera’s evidence is that she should have been outof her cell for ten hours per day.

Her evidence is that she was deprived of at

least three of these hours every day, and on a number of days, she lostadditional time.

There appear to be only a couple of days of full, ten-hour lock-

down.

[130]

In the period after early December 2015 until 2017, there continued to

be days on which there was some deprivation of the time out of her cell.

Of

these, there are nine days on which she claims to have had a full ten hours oflock-down.

The balance are losses of something between an hour and a few

hours.

[131]

I fully agree with those who have stated before that lock-downs should

not be the norm while one is in custody.

When a facility has rules about what

time prisoners are permitted to be out of their cells, those rules should be thenorm, and not the exception.

Staff shortages cannot, in my view, justify

concluded that lock-downs should not be considered the norm while a person is

prolonged periods of regular lock-down.

When they do, I accept that the

these periods to an offender detained under those conditions.

[132]

I agree with Gilmore J. that it is not possible to simply take the number

of lock-down hours and convert them to days to determine credit to an offender.
There is, in my view, a qualitative difference between the harshness of regularperiods of 24 hour lock-down and the effect of a deprivation of an hour or two outof one’s cell, particularly if there is no evidence that this sort of short deprivationof time results in any loss of outside or exercise time, or any loss of visits orprogramming.

However, I agree that regular deprivation of even a few hours of

time out of a cell may, over a prolonged period, also become harsh.

[133]

I accept that in this case, Ms. Passera has suffered some harshness in

her conditions of incarceration.

She has certainly not had the hours out of her

cell that the rules of her unit would suggest she should have had. She says thatthis has been difficult for her.

[134]

I accept the Crown’s position that there should be credit to Ms. Passera

of three months for the effects of the lock-down and will reduce her sentenceaccordingly.
Aggravating and Mitigating Factors

conditions of incarceration may become so harsh as to justify giving credit for

There is little to say about the aggravating factors present other than

that this was the importation of almost two kilograms of cocaine into Canada.

I

find that Ms. Passera, like most of those who import drugs, was motivated bygreed.

[136]

I find the following mitigating factors:

 Ms. Passera was relatively young when she committed this offence;
 Ms. Passera is a first offender;
 Ms. Passera was not the mastermind behind this importation.

Her role

was as a willing courier;
 While in custody, Ms. Passera has taken meaningful and significant stepstowards her own rehabilitation by availing herself of the many programsoffered at Vanier and choosing to engage in personal therapy;
 Ms. Passera has a supportive circle of friends and family.
Sentence to be Imposed

[137]

Ms. Passera is entitled to credit on a 1.5:1 basis for the time that she

has spent in custody.

She was arrested on August 24, 2014.

2017, she has served 992 days.

As of May 11,

She is entitled to credit for this of 1488 days,

which is to be deducted from the sentence to be imposed.

She should also

receive some credit for the period of time she has been in lock-down. As I haveindicated, I credit her three months, or 90 days, for this time.

[135]

[138]

In my view, a fit sentence in all of the circumstances is six years. This

Passera, given all of the circumstances, including the aggravating and mitigatingfactors present in this case.

Six years is 2191 days. Once the pre-sentence

custody is credited, this leaves a sentence of 720 days.
credit, the sentence that remains is 613 days.

With the lock-down

This is one year and 265 days.

That is the sentence imposed today.
Ancillary Orders

[139]

The Crown seeks a DNA order, a forfeiture order, a s. 109 order and a

victim fine surcharge.

[140]

I make the following ancillary orders:

 A forfeiture order of the cocaine under s. 16(1)(a) of the Controlled Drugsand Substances Act;

A D.N.A. order under s. 487.051 of the Criminal Code;

 A s. 109(2)(a) firearms order for ten years and a s. 109(2)(b) for life;
 A victim fine surcharge order.

[141]

I wish to thank counsel for their assistance in this case.

is at the low end of the Cunningham range, which I think is appropriate for Ms.

Woollcombe J.

Released: May 11, 2017

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
– and –
Deanna PasseraREASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Woollcombe J.
Released: May 11, 2017

CITATION: R. v. Passera 2017 ONSC 2799
COURT FILE NO.: 1304/15
DATE: 2017 05 11

