CITATION: R. v. A.-R., 2017 ONSC 3105

COURT FILE NO.: 128/16
DATE: 2017 05 19

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
SUMMARY CONVICTION APPEAL COURT
BETWEEN:

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
Respondent
– and –
A.-R.
Appellant

Arish Khoorshed, for the Respondent

Mark Halfyard, for the Appellant

HEARD: May 10, 2017

PUBLICATION RESTRICTION NOTICE
By court order made under subsection 486.4(1) of the CriminalCode, information that may identify the person described inthis judgment as the complainant may not be published,broadcasted or transmitted in any manner. This judgmentcomplies with this restriction so that it can be published.

[On appeal from the judgment of Justice David A. Harris of the Ontario Court of Justicedated July 26, 2016, with Reasons reported at 2016 ONCJ 479]

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Woollcombe J.

ONTARIO

Introduction

[1]

On July 26, 2017, after a two day trial before Justice Harris, the appellant

interference. He appeals against his conviction.

[2]

The appellant raises three grounds of appeal:
a. That the trial judge erred in concluding that the complainant’s motherdid not adopt portions of her police statements. This error is said tobe significant because the defence says that had this evidence beenaccepted by the trial judge as having been adopted, it would haveestablished an inconsistency in the complainant’s evidence and analternative source of her sexual knowledge.
b. That the trial judge erred in using the absence of evidence tocorroborate the complainant’s account.
c. That the trial judge erred in not analysing the inconsistencies in thecomplainant’s evidence cumulatively, leading to an unreasonableverdict.

[3]

I will address briefly each of the arguments advanced on the appeal.

Did the trial judge err in concluding that the complainant’s mother did notadopt portions of her police statement?

[4]

As I understand the appellant’s position, it is that the trial judge erred in

finding that the complainant’s mother did not adopt her statement to the policethat M.A. (the complainant) knew a boy at school who talked to her “about sex allthe time”.

The appellant says that this is significant because part of the reason

that the trial judge accepted that the complainant’s allegations were proven

was convicted of sexual assault, invitation to sexual touching and sexual

beyond a reasonable doubt was his conclusion that the complainant had not

[5]

It is important to look carefully at the evidence.

[6]

In her evidence, the complainant’s mother was asked whether she

recalled her daughter telling her that a boy in her school said he wanted to havesex with her. The mother replied, “no”.

[7]

The mother was then referred to her statement to police.

She was

referred to a specific passage and testified that, “it doesn’t honestly refresh mymemory, but I said it, so it must have been true at the time”.

[8]

Counsel then read to the mother from parts of her statement. In the first

passage, it appears that the mother told the police that there was a boy in herdaughter’s class who was talking about sex all the time.

Counsel then read a

passage in which the mother said that her daughter had told her that “those twolike each other and they’re going to have sex” and she asked her daughter if sheknew what sex meant, and was told “kissing”.

The witness was asked if that

refreshed her memory.

[9]

The complainant’s mother did not answer directly.

She responded, “I

think that she was talking about like a little boy saying, “Those two kids aregonna have sex” but said that it had not been a reference by her daughter toanyone having sex with her.
issue.

There was further cross-examination about this

It was suggested to the mother that her daughter told her that this boy

was talking about sex all the time.

The mother acknowledged that this is what

she had said.

[10]

At one point, the complainant’s mother agreed that her daughter

appeared to think that sex was just kissing. At another point, she confirmed that

been influenced by learning about sexual matters elsewhere, including at school.

if her daughter had said anything further, she would have followed up with theschool office.
When the complainant testified, she was asked whether she recalled

telling her mother that a boy said he wanted to have sex with her. She testifiedthat she did not remember this and that it never happened.

She said that boys

never said that they wanted to kiss her and that boys usually talked about school.

[12]

It was suggested to the complainant that someone at school may have

taught her, or given her the idea, about touching her father‘s penis. She deniedthis.

[13]

The complainant was never asked whether there was a boy at school

talking about sex all the time.

[14]

Beginning at para. 58 of his decision, the trial judge considered what he

characterized as the “fourth alleged inconsistency”. He noted that:
…counsel argued that M.A. denied the suggestion that a boy at school hadtalked to her about sex whereas her mother testified that the boy talked aboutsex all the time…

[15]

The submissions of counsel at the conclusion of the trial have not been

placed before me.

The only record I have about what counsel argued is this

passage in which the trial judge summarized the argument.

[16]

In his reasons, the trial judge accurately concluded that there was no

inconsistency between what the complainant and her mother said about whethera boy at school had talked about sex all the time. There was no inconsistency.
The complainant was never asked the relevant question.

As the trial judge

correctly stated, she was asked if a boy had said he wanted to have sex with herand she denied this.

In my view, the trial judge made no error in rejecting

counsel’s suggestion that there was an inconsistency between what the mother

[11]

said and what the complainant said about whether there was a boy at school whotold her that he wanted to have sex with her.
The trial judge then addressed the further argument that appears to have

been made by trial counsel: that there had been a boy at school who talkedabout sex all the time.

I accept appeal counsel’s argument that had the trial

judge had evidence upon which to find that there was a boy at the complainant’sschool who talked about sex all the time, depending on what the nature of whatwas said, this might be relevant to assessing whether there was a place otherthan the allegations from which the complainant learned about sex.

[18]

The difficulty with the appellant’s position is that there was no admissible

evidence supporting the inference that the complainant learned about sex atschool.

The complainant was never asked whether there was a boy at school

who talked about sex all the time. She was the person who was there. She wasthe only person who was in the position to give direct evidence as to what sheheard and learned from others at school.

[19]

The appellant’s argument seems to be that the trial judge ought to have

concluded that there was evidence that the trial judge should have relied uponthat the complainant learned about sex at school. I reject this argument.

[20]

The trial judge’s first reason for rejecting the defence argument was that

the mother never adopted the passage from her statement in which she is said tohave told police that her daughter told her that a boy at school talked about sexall the time.

I accept the appellant’s position that for a witness to adopt a

statement, the witness needs to acknowledge having made the statement andacknowledge it to be true.

[17]

The manner in which the mother was cross-examined about her previous

statement was somewhat unorthodox.
statement she had read was true.

Early on, she agreed that a part of the

Subsequently, she acknowledged that counsel

had accurately said what she said in her statement.

But, when it came to the

issue of whether her daughter had ever said that a boy at school talked aboutsex all the time, she agreed that this is what she had said but was not askedwhether the contents of what she said were true.

In the normal course, this is

required before it can be said that a statement has been adopted. I understand,therefore, why the trial judge came to the conclusion that he did as far aswhether the mother adopted the statement.

[22]

At the same time, I accept appeal counsel’s position that the cross-

examination as a whole suggests that the complainant confirmed in hertestimony that her daughter did say that her daughter told her that a boy talkedabout sex.

I infer that she was accepting the accuracy of what she had said in

her statement by the rest of her evidence.

[23]

However, even if the trial judge could have concluded that the mother

adopted her prior statement, he was correct in concluding that the mother’sstatement was hearsay evidence, and not admissible for its truth. There was nosuggestion that she was present for whatever was said at school.

[24]

The appellant argues that the Crown at trial raised no objection that the

mother’s evidence was hearsay.

While the Crown did not object to the cross-

examination, I have no way of knowing whether in her submissions at the end ofthe trial, the Crown raised the issue of the mother’s evidence being hearsay.
am not sure much turns on this anyways.

I

Inadmissible hearsay evidence does

not become admissible if the Crown fails to object to it at the time it is adduced.
It would be an error for the trial judge to rely on inadmissible hearsay evidence.

[21]

The appellant further submits that the mother’s hearsay evidence might

have been admissible.

I cannot accept this submission.

presumptively inadmissible for its truth.

Hearsay evidence is

Hearsay evidence may be admitted

pursuant to a principled analysis of its necessity and reliability.

[26]

In this case, I fail to see how the mother’s hearsay statement about what

her daughter told her had been said by a boy at school could ever meet thenecessity requirement.

The complainant was available to testify. She did testify.

She was asked about conversations at school.

Counsel chose not to ask her

whether a boy talked about sex all the time at school. Having not even sought ananswer from the person who was best positioned to give direct evidence, trialcounsel could not have succeeded in having the mother’s hearsay statement asto what her daughter had told her about what had been said at school meet thenecessity requirement for admissibility.

[27]

I find that the trial judge properly concluded that the hearsay statement of

the mother was not admissible evidence.

[28]

Even if the trial judge had concluded that the mother adopted her police

statement,

and

had concluded that the mother’s hearsay

statement was

admissible for its truth, there was a further problem with the use that the defencewanted to make of the child’s statement.

As the trial counsel pointed out at

para. 67, there was no evidence at all as to what the complainant would havemeant had she told her mother had a boy “talked about sex”. To the extent thatthere was evidence on this issue, it appears from her mother’s evidence that thecomplainant understood sex to be only kissing.

This, of course, could not have

assisted the defence position that the complainant learned about the sexualactivity she alleged from what she heard at school.

[25]

[29]

In summary, while the appellant frames his argument as one of error in

the trial judge not finding that the mother adopted her earlier statement, this

and the arguments that appear to have been advanced.

On the basis of the

record, I am of the view that the trial judge correctly determined that there was noinconsistency between the complainant and her mother and made no error inconcluding that the only evidence about the complainant learning about sex fromschool was hearsay and so not admissible.
Did the trial judge err in using the absence of evidence to corroborate thecomplainant’s account?

[30]

The appellant submits that the trial judge erred when he concluded, at

para. 66 of his judgment that:
…mother actually corroborated M.A.’s answer that she never told her mother thata boy at school wanted to have sex with her…

[31]

The appellant submits that the mother’s evidence was that she did not

recall this.

The argument is made that the lack of recollection on the mother’s

part cannot amount to corroboration of the complainant, and that the trial judgeinappropriately bolstered the complainant’s credibility on this basis.

[32]

I do not accept the appellant’s position that the trial judge erred in his

characterization of this evidence.

The complainant said that she never told her

mother that a boy said he wanted to have sex with her.

When asked if she

recalled her daughter telling her that a boy said he wanted to have sex with her,the mother answered that she did not recall this. I think that all that the trial judgewas saying was that there was no inconsistency between the complainant andher mother about the fact that the complainant had never told her mother that aboy at school wanted to have sex with her. Read in context, I do not agree that

argument must be understood in the context of the evidence that was adduced

the trial judge relied on the fact that the mother said she did not recall this to

Did the trial judge err in not analyzing the inconsistencies in thecomplainant’s evidence cumulatively, leading to an unreasonable verdict?

[33]

The appellant also submits that the trial judge erred in not assessing the

reliability and credibility of the complainant against all of the inconsistencies andthe evidence as a whole. As I understand his position, he acknowledges that thetrial judge dealt with many of the alleged inconsistencies in the complainant’sevidence.

However, it is argued that the trial judge needed to go further in his

analysis and determine the cumulative effect of these inconsistencies.

[34]

I do not agree.

[35]

At para. 39 of his reasons, before he embarked on an analysis of the

alleged inconsistencies of the complainant, the trial judge recognized, expressly,that in assessing her credibility, he needed to examine inconsistencies in whatshe said in the witness box and what she said on previous occasions.
recognized,

as

well,

He

that inconsistencies on material matters can justify

concluding that a witness is neither credible nor reliable.

He c oncluded, “in

determining this, it is necessary to look at the totality of the evidence”.

[36]

The trial judge then carefully reviewed all of the alleged inconsistencies in

the complainant’s evidence.

He went further and considered an inconsistency in

her evidence that had not been argued by counsel.

[37]

Finally, at para. 148, the trial judge stressed that he had taken all of the

relevant factors into account in deciding the case, and that he had considered allof the evidence in totality and not considered any one factor in isolation. It wasonly at that point that he stated that he found that the complainant was credibleand reliable.

improperly bolster the complainant’s credibility.

[38]

Having reviewed the trial judge’s careful and thorough assessment of the

complainant’s evidence, I am satisfied that he considered the evidence as a

I see no error.
Conclusion

[39]

The appeal is dismissed.

Woollcombe J.
Released: May 19, 2017

whole in reaching the conclusions that he did about her credibility and reliability.

CITATION: R. v. A.-R., 2017 ONSC 3105

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
SUMMARY CONVICTION APPEAL COURT
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN

– and –
A.-R.

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
WOOLLCOMBE J.
Released: May 19, 2017

COURT FILE NO.: 128/16
DATE: 2017 05 19

