ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
B E T W E E N:

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
Respondent )
– and –
HUSSEIN DAYA
Accused )

Ron Krueger and Michael Passeri, for theCrown

Stephen Feldman, for the Applicant (accused)

HEARD: May 12, 2017

Thorburn J.
RULING ON STAY APPLICATION PURSUANT TO s. 11(b) OF THE CHARTER
1.

OVERVIEW

[1]
It will take 36 months for this trial to be completed. The net delay is 34 ½ months aftertaking into account the inordinate time for the Applicant, Hussein Daya, to obtain counsel.

[2]
The Applicant claims that his Charter right to be tried within a reasonable time has beenviolated because the 30-month ceiling for the prosecution of cases has been exceeded. Hetherefore seeks to stay this charge of possession of one ounce of cocaine for the purpose oftrafficking.

[3]
The issue to be determined is whether the charge should be stayed for delay pursuant tosections 11(b) and 24(2) of the Charter. Both sides have been somewhat complacent aboutmoving matters forward:
a. The Applicant never asked to sever his claim from the others or seek anearly trial date. On the contrary, he agreed to all of the proposed dates.
b. The Crown never offered to sever the Applicant’s claim from the restafter being told by the Applicant that he had no interest in participatingin the joint Garofoli application pursued by other accused. Moreover,

CITATION: R. v. Daya, 2017 ONSC 3072
COURT FILE NO.: CR-17-30000328-0000
DATE: 20170515

the Crown never asked the Applicant to waive the delay for the hearingof the Garofoli application knowing that the Applicant had expressed nointerest in it and knowing that it would take a good deal of time toresolve.
2.

HISTORY OF THIS PROCEEDING

[4]
In late 2003, the Toronto Police Service began a joint forces wiretap investigation intofive gangs in Toronto.

[5]
On April 16, 2014, police claim they observed Ken Mai leave his residence with abackpack. Ken Mai was a target of this investigation. Mai entered a vehicle occupied by theApplicant. The backpack was left unopened in the back seat of the vehicle. Mai left the vehicleand the Applicant drove away and was stopped a short distance away. Police seized thebackpack and allowed the Applicant to drive away. The backpack was later found to contain oneounce of cocaine.

[6]

Prior to this date, the Applicant was not a person of interest in the investigation.

[7]
On May 28, 2014, over 50 search warrants were executed, 120 people, including theApplicant, were arrested, and large amounts of drugs and cash were seized. The Applicant wascharged with one count of possession of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking. He was releasedon bail.

[8]
Extensive disclosure was provided to all of the accused persons. At the first global PreTrial, Downes J. asked whether there were any severance issues. The Crown advised that it wasprepared to sever cases but that if there was to be a Garofoli application the cases might as wellbe kept together.

[9]
On the last day of the Preliminary Inquiry in the Fall of 2015, counsel for the Applicantadvised that he elected to be tried by a judge alone but that he might have no choice in the matteras other accused had elected to be tried by judge and jury.

[10] A Garofoli application was scheduled involving many of the co-accused to challenge thewiretaps and observations made and surveillance conducted in the common areas of thecondominiums (of others, not the Applicant). Had the Garofoli application succeeded, thecharges against the Applicant would have been stayed.

[11] On March 10, 2016 counsel for the Applicant advised that, “Yeah, my client has really nointerest in terms of the Garofoli but if we return on May the 9th hopefully the matter willcrystallize for my client in the interim period of time.”

[12] Counsel for the Applicant agreed to the dates set during various stages of the proceedingand did not complain of the delay.

3.

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

[14] The Applicant claims that the Crown has an obligation to move matters forward and toremain cognizant of the time limits set in Jordan even in cases where multiple accused arecharged as part of a joint investigation. The Applicant claims that if his case had been separatedin March 2016, after he expressed no interest in participating in the Garofoli application (whichtook over 10 months to complete), he would have been tried within a reasonable time.

[15] He notes that the 34 ½ month net delay exceeds the limit set in Jordan and that even ifthe former guidelines were invoked, this is a simple case involving only one charge, the charge isagainst this accused only, and given the simplicity of the case, there is no excuse for the delay.

[16] The Crown concedes that it could have severed this proceeding from the rest of the groupas there was no claim tying the Applicant to other accused and /or the Crown could have askedthe Applicant to expressly waive the time for hearing the Garofoli application. However, theCrown claims that the Defence could and should have made some effort to move mattersforward. Not only did the Applicant not move matters forward, the Applicant expresslyconsented to the dates.
4.

THE LAW IN RESPECT OF UNREASONABLE DELAY

[17] The case of R. v. Jordan, 2016 SCC 27 stipulates temporal ceilings for the prosecution ofcriminal cases in Canada. Cases that proceed to the Superior Court must be tried within 30
months from the time of arrest. Any delay clearly waived by the Defence or caused by theDefence is then subtracted from the total calculation. If the time from arrest to the end of trialless Defence delay exceeds 30 months, section 11(b) of the Charter is presumed to be violatedand the proceeding will be stayed unless there are exceptional circumstances.

[18] Once the presumptive ceiling is exceeded, the burden shifts to the Crown to rebut thepresumption of unreasonableness on the basis of exceptional circumstances.
i.

Calculate the total delay, from the date the charges were laid to the actualor anticipated end of trial;

ii.

Subtract Defence delay from the total delay;

iii.

Compare the net delay to the presumptive ceiling. If the net delay exceedsthe presumptive ceiling, it is presumptively unreasonable. To rebut the

[13] The total time to the conclusion of trial is 36 months. The parties agree that the net delayis 34 ½ months.

iv.

Exceptional circumstances can include discrete events or particularlycomplex cases;

v.

Delay caused by discrete events is subtracted from the net delay for thepurpose of determining whether the presumptive ceiling has been reached;

vi.

Where there is delay resulting from the fact that a case is particularlycomplex, and the presumptive ceiling is exceeded, the court must considerwhether the particular complexity was such that the time the case took isjustified and the delay is reasonable;

vii.

If the remaining delay falls below the presumptive ceiling, the onus is onthe Defence to show that the delay is unreasonable.

[20] Complex pre-trial proceedings are not delay attributable to the Defence, assuming theyare not frivolous. However, they may amount to exceptional circumstances that justifylengthening the 30-month ceiling. (R. v. Jordan, supra at paras. 72, 77 and 81.). The hallmarksof complex cases are those that include voluminous disclosure, a large number of witnesses, andsignificant requirements for expert evidence and charges that cover a long period.

[21] The Applicant relies on the decisions in R. v. Vassell, [2016] S.C.J. No. 26 and R. v.
[22] On appeal in Manasseri, Manasseri’s co-accused argued that his trial had beensignificantly delayed because of steps taken by Manasseri. At para. 323 Watt J.A. held that:
Where the Crown, as here, chooses to prosecute both accused jointly, itmust remain vigilant that its decision to proceed jointly does notcompromise the s. 11(b) rights of an individual accused: Vassell, at para.
5.

[23] The Crown correctly points out however, that in each of those cases, the accused hadmade best efforts to move matters forward. Despite their best efforts, the trials became boggeddown as a result of things beyond their control. As such, those cases are distinguishable fromthis case.

[25] Mr. Ching did not expedite matters or indicate a concern with section 11(b) until shortlybefore bringing his motion. Ducharme J. held that, “Indeed, he inexplicably failed to comply

presumption, the Crown must establish the presence of exceptionalcircumstances. Absent exceptional circumstances, a stay will follow;

[26] However, since the delay exceeded the guidelines and the presumptive ceiling, DucharmeJ. concluded that,
“… the central problem was the Crown’s inexplicable decision to prosecuteMr. Ching with the other accused in the Project Infinity investigation. I
asked Ms. Crackower about why this was done and all she could say wasthat all of the charges were the result of the same investigation. That is nota viable excuse. The case against Mr. Ching was readily severable as wasdemonstrated by the separate prosecution of Mr. Faihz or Mr. Vallegas. Yetthe severance of Mr. Ching was not done until after the preliminary inquirymore than a year after Mr. Ching’s arrest.
More seriously, unlike the case against some of Mr. Ching’s former coaccused, the case against Mr. Ching was extremely simple. The Crownneed only call the surveillance officers who saw Mr. Ching put the bag inthe car and then lead evidence about the contents of the bag, specifically thatit contained methamphetamine. That is the entirety of the Crown’s caseagainst Mr. Ching. None of the rest of the evidence the Crown was leadingagainst the other co-accused is relevant to this discrete transaction. Therange of defences available to Mr. Ching is limited. But more importantlythey are not related to the other evidence being led against his former coaccused.
I also reject the submission that the Crown “continually made efforts tomove the matter along expeditiously.” … While on June 26, 2014, Mr.Alibhai for the Crown mentioned the possibility of moving the matterforward or of severing accused, this was apparently not followed up byeither the Crown or Defence. This is not consistent with the Crown’s dutyto ensure that an accused’s s. 11(b) rights are respected.

[27] For these reasons, he held that the Crown failed to satisfy the Court that delay is justifiedbased on the parties’ reasonable reliance on the law as it previously existed under the Moringuidelines.

[28] Where an accused was charged prior to July 8, 2016, the transitional frameworkdeveloped in Jordan applies. In such cases, in addition to the above factors, the court mustconsider whether there are transitional exceptional circumstances that justify the delay under thepreviously existing Morin framework. The Court must balance the interests of the accused andthe societal interests in a trial on the merits. (See: R v. Williamson; R. v. Lahiry, 2011 ONSC
with some of the policies of the Court that are designed to minimize delay and promoteorganized and efficient litigation of cases.”

C.A.), at paragraph 25.) On the other hand, society's interests should not permit the accused's
"constitutional rights to be eviscerated" (see: R. v. S.H., [2008] O.J. No. 5736 at paragraph 74).

[30] Where delay exceeds the 30-month ceiling, a transitional circumstance will only applywhere the Crown establishes that the delay is justified because of the parties’ reasonable relianceon the law as it existed at the time. A contextual assessment is required since the parties’
behaviour “cannot be judged strictly against a standard of which they had no notice.” (Jordan, atpara. 96.)
4.

ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION

[31] The parties agree that the total delay from the date charges were laid to the anticipatedend of the trial is 36 months. The net delay is 34 ½ months. This exceeds the presumptive 30
months set out in the Jordan decision.

[32] Since the presumptive ceiling is exceeded, the burden shifts to the Crown to rebut thepresumption of unreasonableness on the basis of exceptional circumstances.

[33]

The Crown suggests that,a. this case is complex because it is a Project case with over 30 accused persons;andb. the transitional exception applies because the parties reasonably relied on theframework that existed for the determination of delay that existed before theJordan decision was rendered.

[34] Although there was a complicated investigation involving multiple accused, afterreviewing the disclosure, it was clear that the case against the Applicant involved only oneinteraction with a target of the investigation, he was not the subject of the wiretap orsurveillance, and involved one transaction where a bag was left by a target in the Applicant’s car.
In short, this was a simple case.

[35] Moreover, unlike the companion case in Saccoccia, the Applicant in this case expressedno interest in the Garofoli application which took over 10 months to complete.
v. Stilwell, 2014 ONCA 563 (CanLII), 324 O.A.C. 72.)

[37] Since the Crown asserts that a successful Garofoli application would have resulted instaying this charge, the Crown could and should have either (a) obtained an express waiver of thetime to conduct the Garofoli application from the Applicant and or (b) agreed to sever this casefrom the rest such that an early trial date could have been obtained for this one week judge alonetrial that involves one count of drug trafficking. This would have put the Applicant to hiselection to either proceed with this trial before resolution of the Garofoli application or waive thedelay so that his trial could await the outcome of the Garofoli application. The failure to do so isinconsistent with the Crown’s obligation to move matters forward and with the Crown’s onusgiven that the Jordan timeframe was exceeded.

[38] I further find there are no exceptional circumstances that justify additional delay.
Although this was a complex investigation, by the time of the Garofoli application it was clearthat the case against this Applicant was not complicated, and did not need to be linked to theothers.

[39] Lastly, even if this is considered a transitional case because the Jordan decision wasreleased after these charges were laid, a stay of this charge is warranted in these circumstances.1. the length of delay;2. waiver of periods;3. reasons for the delay, including
(a) inherent time requirements of the case,
(b) actions of the parties,
(c) limits on institutional resources and other reasons, and
(d) prejudice to the accused.

[40]

Account must be taken of the interests which s. 11(b) is designed to protect.

[41] In this case, the time in question is not reasonable having regard to the explanation for thedelay, the fact that as of March 2016 it was easily avoidable, and the effect on the accused. Thedelay in this case moderately exceeds the presumptive ceiling and the Crown could and shouldhave avoided the unnecessary delay. In these circumstances, the fact that the Applicant did not

[36] At that point, since the Crown chose to prosecute many accused together, as noted by thecourt in Manasseri, it must remain vigilant that its decision to proceed jointly does notcompromise the s. 11(b) rights of an individual accused.

[42]

For these reasons, this Application to stay these proceedings for delay is granted.

Thorburn J.
Released: May 15, 2017

actively seek to move this matter forward is not determinative. The accused’s right to a trialwithin a reasonable time outweighs the societal interest in a trial on the merits of this charge.

CITATION: R. v. Daya, 2017 ONSC 3072
COURT FILE NO.: CR-17-30000328-0000
DATE: 20170515

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
B E T W E E N:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
– and –
HUSSEIN DAYA
Accused

RULING ON STAY APPLICATION PURSUANT
TO S. 11(b) OF THE CHARTER

Thorburn J.

Released: May 15, 2017

