CITATION: R. v. Mikasinovic, 2017 ONSC 3192
COURT FILE NO.: CR-16-10000760-0000
DATE: 20170525

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN

– and –

NEDELJKO MIKASINOVIC

Marnie Goldenberg, for the Crown

Chris Murphy, for Nedeljko Mikasinovic

HEARD: April 18, 2017

R.F. GOLDSTEIN J.
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT ON SENTENCING
1. Overview

[1]
In the early morning hours of June 22, 2013 Nedeljko Mikasinovic threw two punches atTim Runge. Mr. Runge suffered a serious head injury. Mr. Mikasinovic was tried on anindictment containing one count of aggravated assault. A jury convicted him of the includedoffence of assault causing bodily harm. He now comes before this Court for sentencing.
2. The Facts
(a) Circumstances of the offence

[2]
During the evening of June 21-22, 2013 Tim Runge was out with his friends Aruf Nath,Marc Casaponsa, and Marc’s friend family Ida from Spain. At around 2:00 am on June 22,2013, after a night of partying and dancing, they were walking up Spadina Road in front of

ONTARIO

2

[3]
The same night, Nedeljko Mikasinovic was out with his girlfriend, a business associate,Vasilios Panagiotakopoulos, and Mr. Panagiotakopoulos’s then fiancée, Natalia. After a nightout they stopped at Swatow Restaurant on Spadina Road. They came out some time after 2:00
am. They got into Mr. Panagiotakopoulos’s car. He was in the driver’s seat. Natalia was in thefront passenger seat. Mr. Mikasinovic was behind her in the rear passenger seat, with hisgirlfriend behind Mr. Panagiotakopoulos.

[4]
Mr. Casaponsa and his friends were standing on Spadina Road behind Mr.Panagiotakopoulos’s car. Mr. Panagiotakopoulos moved the car backward and touched Ms.Genc’s leg. Mr. Casaponsa reacted and said words to the effect of “watch where you’re going.”
He banged on the car. He went to the passenger side window to deliver a message of “watchout”. I find that Mr. Casaponsa likely did touch the car with some force and that he likely yelledat the driver. That is consistent with the evidence of Dr. Weizenberg, who I find was the mostaccurate and neutral witness at the trial.

[5]
Mr. Mikasinovic immediately exited the car. The evidence is in dispute about whether hewas immediately aggressive and hostile. Mr. Panagiotakopoulos testified that Mr. Mikasinovicsaid: “oh my God, What happened?” He got out of the car to check to see if anyone was injured.
Natalia Panagiotakopoulos testified that Mr. Mikasinovic turned around to see if anyone washurt. It is unclear how she would know that as she was facing in the opposite direction. He gotout of the car and said something like “why did you hit the window?” She said it was terrifying.
Mr. Mikasinovic says that he got out of the car to investigate and make sure that nobody wasinjured. He says he was set upon and reacted defensively.

[6]
All the other witnesses testified that Mr. Mikasinovic was angry and aggressive when hegot out of the car. Ms. Genc and Dr. Weizenberg both testified that he got out and began yellingsomething along the lines of: “don’t touch the fucking car”. Mr. Casaponsa testified that Mr.Mikasinovic was immediately hostile.

[7]
Two video cameras pointed at Spadina Avenue captured many of the events that night. I
set them out here (the times are not synchronized):
SWATOW RESTAURANT ENTRANCE CAMERA:
TIME

EVENT

2:28:41

Mr. Runge, Mr. Casaponsa, Mr. Nath, and Ida walk by Swatow Restaurant

2:29:08

Mr. Casaponsa is in front of Swatow restaurant with his friend Ms. Genc.

Swatow Restaurant, just south of D’Arcy Street. It was there that they ran into Mr. Casaponsa’sfriend Esra Genc, her boyfriend Marc Weizenberg, and Ms. Genc’s friend Kunny Ma.

2:29:27

Mr. Runge comes back into the video in front of Swatow Restaurant.

2:30:19

Mr. Runge starts to ride his bicycle north on Spadina.

2:31:00

Mr. Nath and Ida begin to walk north on Spadina.

2:32:25

Mr. Mikasinovic’s party begins to exit Swatow Restaurant.

2:32:55

Mr. Panagiotakopoulos’s car begins to move backwards

2:33:14

Mr. Mikasinovic is out of the car, facing it. He is moving slowly backwards, thenshortly begins to move forward back towards the car.

2:33:20

Ms. Ma faces Mr. Mikasinovic, pointing at him.

2:33:22

Mr. Runge can be seen walking towards where Mr. Mikasinovic is facing the Ms.Ma and Ms. Genc.

2:33:24

Ms. Genc attempts to get between Mr. Mikasinovic and Ms. Ma.

2:33:26

Mr. Mikasinovic begins moving backwards quickly. There is no one near him onthe sidewalk. To his left are the two women.

2:33:28

Mr. Mikasinovic moves towards Mr. Runge, and starts to raise his fists.

2:33:29

Mr. Mikasinovic takes a punch with his right hand. It is unclear from the videowhether he actually lands this punch on Mr. Casaponsa.

2:33:30

Mr. Mikasinovic begins to move back, then moves back towards the car, whereMr. Runge is standing. Nobody is attacking him.

2:33:33

Mr. Mikasinovic takes a punch with his right hand. He begins to move back, withhis fists in front of him.

2:33:37

Mr. Mikasinovic begins to move towards Mr. Runge.

2:33:39

Mr. Mikasinovic begins to move out of the video. Only his lower half is visible.
Others start to move towards where Mr. Runge and Mr. Mikasinovic have moved.

2:33:43

Mr. Mikasinovic begins to walk away.

3

4

TIME

EVENT

2:16:41

Mr. Nath and Ida are at the corner of D’Arcy Street and Spadina Road.

2:18:25

Mr. Nath looks back towards Mr. Panagiotakopoulos’s car.

2:18:41

Mr. Nath looks back again towards Mr. Panagiotakopoulos’s car.

2:18:56

Mr. Runge appears in the video walking at a normal pace from D’Arcy Streettowards Panagiotakopoulos’s car. He slows down where Mr. Nath is standing andthen walks at a slightly faster pace.

2:19:02

Mr. Runge disappears out of the video.

2:19:06

Mr. Mikasinovic’s foot appears in the video moving backwards. He then movesforward.

2:19:09

Mr. Mikasinovic moves backwards towards where Mr. Nath is standing.

2:19:10

Mr. Mikasinovic moves aggressively towards Mr. Panagiotakopoulos’s car andout of the video. This appears to be when he takes the first punch.

2:19:14

Mr. Mikasinovic moves backwards again towards where Mr. Nath is standing,and then moves aggressively back again towards Mr. Runge. His hands are up.
He punches Mr. Runge.

2:19:15

Mr. Mikasinovic pursues Mr. Runge, who is moving backwards away from Mr.Mikasinovic. Mr. Runge puts his hand up to block Mr. Mikasinovic.

2:19:16

Mr. Mikasinovic punches Mr. Runge in the head.

2:19:17

Mr. Runge falls to the ground. Mr. Mikasinovic walks away.

[8]
For reasons I will discuss in a moment, I do not accept that Mr. Mikasinovic acted in selfdefence at any time. I do find he was immediately hostile and aggressive throughout.

CORNER OF D’ARCY AND SPADINA CAMERA:

[9]
The jury apparently rejected the testimony of Ms. Panagiotakopoulos that she was in fearfor her life. I agree. I also reject the testimony of Mr. Panagiotakopoulos, as did the jury, thatMr. Mikasinovic got out of the car and was surrounded by a hostile crowd and attacked by twolarger men. Their evidence was plainly exaggerated and contrived to help Mr. Mikasinovic.
They undoubtedly colluded with each other. Ms. Panagiotakopoulos claimed to be worried thatthe crowd might murder Mr. Mikasinovic but she didn’t bother to call the police. She was inmedical school at the time and working in an emergency room but didn’t get out to help Mr.Runge, although she saw him seriously injured right in front of her. Mr. Panagiotakopoulos tookoff to leave his friend to face the supposedly murderous crowd alone.

[10] I accept the evidence of the other witnesses that Mr. Mikasinovic was hostile andaggressive from the moment he got out of the car. Dr. Weizenberg testified that Mr.Mikasinovic confronted Mr. Casaponsa and pushed him. That is consistent with the explosiveviolence that he displayed only seconds later.

[11] Ms. Ma and Ms. Genc tried to get between Mr. Mikasinovic and Mr. Casaponsa. It istrue that Mr. Mikasinovic did not physically push Ms. Genc and Ms. Ma. They were muchsmaller than him, and Mr. Casaponsa is much slighter. It is obvious from the video that he feltno threat. At no time did Dr. Weizenberg, who is a larger man, ever confront Mr. Mikasinovicor even move towards him. Mr. Runge then came in. I find on the whole of the evidence that heattempted to defuse the situation. Something of a shoving match then ensued between Mr.Mikasinovic and Mr. Runge. Mr. Mikasinovic threw a punch at Mr. Casaponsa, which either didnot land or landed only minimally; he then threw two punches at Mr. Runge. The first landedand threw Mr. Runge off-balance. He staggered backwards. The second punch landed square onMr. Runge’s head. He collapsed.

[12] I do not accept that Mr. Runge was the person who began pushing although he didintervene between Mr. Casaponsa and Mr. Mikasinovic. That said, Mr. Runge did not display anaggressive demeanor that night. The person who chose to get out of the car, to aggressivelyconfront the people on the street, and then throw a series of punches was Mr. Mikasinovic.
(b) The Claim of Self-Defence

[13] Mr. Mikasinovic testified at trial that he was in fear for his life. He thought a hostilecrowd surrounded him. He says that he believed he was under attack. He didn’t know, he said,that Mr. Casaponsa marketed chocolate, that Dr. Weizenberg was a dentist, that Mr. Naf was aneuroscientist, and that Mr. Runge was a publisher.

[14] Mr. Murphy acknowledges that the jury rejected Mr. Mikasinovic’s claim of self-defence.
He argues, however, that it is open to me to find that Mr. Mikasinovic’s first two punches weretaken in self-defence, and it is only the third punch, the one that seriously injured Mr. Runge,that constituted the offence.

5

6

[16] I am bound by the express and implied findings of the jury. Where it is unclear what thejury decided I must make my own findings of fact where it necessary for the determination ofsentence: Criminal Code, s. 724; R. v. Punko, 2012 SCC 39 at paras. 11-12. I do have somethingof a dilemma, as Mr. Murphy correctly pointed out, because I was not present at the first trialwhere Mr. Mikasinovic was acquitted of assaulting Mr. Casaponsa. I obviously am not in aposition to determine the express or implied findings of that jury. I do, however, have the samevideos. I also have inconsistencies from the first trial and the preliminary inquiry where theywere put to the witnesses.

[17] It is not logically necessary for me to find that the previous jury acquitted Mr.Mikasinovic of the assault on Mr. Casaponsa on the basis of self-defence: R. v. Punko, supra, atpara. 8. Based on the evidence I do have I find that Mr. Mikasinovic either did not make contactwith Mr. Casaponsa, that the contact was trivial or fleeting, or that the contact between them wasconsensual. I reject the contention that he was acquitted because he acted in self-defencetowards Mr. Casaponsa. The whole sequence of events shows that Mr. Mikasinovic was notthreatened, not in danger, and not provoked. In my view, it is very dangerous to watch a videoand analyze it in a second-by-second fashion without keeping the entire sequence of events incontext. That risks isolating individual events and distorting what actually happened. What thewhole of the evidence shows is that Mr. Mikasinovic chose to escalate by first by punching Mr.Casaponsa, then punching Mr. Runge twice. He then pursued Mr. Runge while he was offbalance and reeling backwards with his hands in a defensive position. The third punch cannotbe divorced from this sequence. The violence was unprovoked, gratuitous, and disproportionate.
That is why I reject the claim of self-defence for all three punches.

[18] I must say something about the role of alcohol in all this. It is clear that everyone wasdrinking. Dr. Weizenberg, for example, drank a lot and testified that his perception might havebeen affected. Mr. Runge had been drinking, but he was not drunk. Mr. Mikasinovic testifiedthat he had 4-5 drinks as well as beer at Swatow but that he was stone sober. I rather doubt that.
I suspect that alcohol played something of a role in his anger, but there is no evidence that it wasthe main driver of the violence.
(c) The Included Offence

[19] I charged the jury that the Crown must prove that Mr. Mikasinovic wounded, maimed,disfigured or endangered the life of Mr. Runge in order to convict him of aggravated assault. I
also charged the jury that if they had a reasonable doubt whether the wounding, maiming,disfiguring, or endangering of life of took place, but they were satisfied Mr. Mikasinovic causedbodily harm, they must find him not guilty of aggravated assault, but guilty of assault causingbodily harm.

[15] I respectfully disagree. The jury in this case did not accept Mr. Mikasinovic’s account ofself-defence. Neither did I. I found his account to be contrived, theatrical and insincere. He wasnot in fear at any time. I find that none of the punches he threw that night were in self-defence.
He chose to escalate the confrontation.

7

[21] I find that the jury acquitted Mr. Mikasinovic of aggravated assault because they foundthat the injury was not a wound, a disfiguring, or a maiming. They also found that the injury didnot endanger Mr. Runge’s life. I find, however, the brain injury suffered by Mr. Runge wassevere, permanent, and had the potential to endanger his life if untreated. It is serious on anyview of the evidence, and on any view of the evidence Mr. Mikasinovic caused it: R. v. Yusuf,2010 ONCA 522.
(d) Circumstances of the offender

[22] Mr. Mikasinovic is 33 years old. He came to Canada at the age of 8 with his family.
They were refugees from Croatia. He had some difficulties assimilating, but settled in and wasraised in a healthy environment. His parents worked long hours while he was young. His fatherhas serious health issues. He assists his elderly parents financially.

[23] When he was in his late teens, Mr. Mikasinovic made some poor choices and, as the presentence report put it, began “associating with negative peers.” He accumulated a youth criminalrecord and two adult criminal convictions. He did manage to right himself and graduated fromthe University of Toronto in 2010 with a bachelor’s degree. He went to work in Haiti after the2010 earthquake for about two years. He is currently employed by Terrella Capital. In thatcapacity is involved in promoting a business called Beleave Inc. that will become involved in thelegal distribution of marijuana. Mr. Mikasinovic has been successful in his business career.
There is no question of that.

[24]

Mr. Mikasinovic has a youth criminal record consisting of the following convictions:

January 5, 2002: one count of possession of property obtained by crime over
$5000 for which he received probation;February 15, 2002: one count of possession of property obtained by crime over
$5000 for which he received probation;June 27, 2002: two counts of possession of property obtained by crime under
$5000; one count of mischief under $5000; one count of possession of break-ininstruments. He received 45 days for these offences.

[25] Mr. Mikasinovic also has an adult criminal record consisting of the followingconvictions:

December 18, 2002: one count of fail to comply for which he received a $250
fine;

[20] Dr. Roger Smith, an expert in the area of neuroradiology, gave an opinion that Mr. Rungehad suffered a serious brain injury. The damage is considered permanent and could lead toaltered functions and possibly seizures. Dr. Smith stated that the injury had the potential to belife-threatening, as it was a very severe injury.

8

January 8, 2003: one count of assault and one count of assault causing bodilyharm. He received a suspended sentence for both offences.

[26] After his conviction Mr. Mikasinovic attended six hours of counselling with JulieFreedman. Ms. Freedman is a general practice psychotherapist. She has a bachelor’s degree inpsychology and a master’s of social work. She stated in her letter that Mr. Mikasinovic does nothave alcohol or substance abuse issues. After conducting a Clinical Anger Scale test shedetermined that he is in the low normal range, and does not have anger management issues. Heindicated to her that he wished to gain deeper insight into the issues that led to his criminalconviction. He acknowledged to her the wrongfulness of his past conduct and, to use her words,
“is greatly troubled by it.” He “expressed sincere victim empathy and demonstrated that he hasstrong regret and remorse”.

[27] Although Ms. Freedman noted that she found no anger or substance abuse issues withMr. Mikasinovic, I am frankly not certain of the reliability of her conclusions. Mr. Mikasinovicwas required to complete both a substance abuse program and an anger management program aspart of an earlier probation order. On the night of the incident his behaviour was highlyaggressive. Ms. Freedman did not testify and was not cross-examined. I am inclined to give heropinion little weight. I do not accept that Mr. Mikasinovic does not have anger managementissues given his history and the events that night. It is also difficult for me to give her opinionany weight when she makes the editorial comment that his victim empathy and strong regret andremorse were “sincere”. That is not her job, which was to administer tests and make clinicalconclusions. That said, it is positive and mitigating that Mr. Mikasinovic has sought counselling.
(e) Impact on the victim and the community

[28] This was an unprovoked serious assault on a busy downtown street on a summer night.
Citizens have the right to go about their business and be free of the fear that they might besubject to violence. Minor frictions between citizens are part of daily life. We expect that theywill be handled without violence. Citizens should be able to assume that these frictions will notescalate into serious violence.

[29] The impact of the injury on Mr. Runge was severe. After he recovered from the hospitalhe got regular and strange headaches. He could not read, was upset at things that should notupset him, and was frustrated. He went to a brain injury rehabilitation program. He was also onanti-depressants for a year and a half and could not work for a substantial period of time. Heworks in publishing and it took him a long time to be able to work full time again.

[30] Mr. Runge’s mother gave a victim impact statement. It is clear that she was deeply upsetby the injury to her son, a promising young man who was just launching himself on a career inpublishing. She noted that Mr. Runge now has to deal with depression, anxiety, nervousness,and loss of self-confidence. She noted that the whole ordeal, including two trials, has beenextremely difficult for her family as a whole.

9

3. Legal Parameters

4. Positions of the Crown and Defense

[32] The Crown’s position is that a penitentiary sentence of 2 ½ years is required. Ifsomething less than a penitentiary sentence is not required, then Mr. Mikasinovic should besentenced to a high reformatory sentence with two years of probation.

[33] The defence position is that Mr. Mikasinovic should be sentenced to a suspendedsentence with three years probation. If I am minded to impose a custodial sentence then Mr.Murphy submits that an intermittent sentence is appropriate.
5. Case Law

[34] The range of sentence is wide in cases of personal violence. The range of behavioursencompassed by these assaultive offenses is so wide that virtually any case can be found tojustify virtually any sentence. There are cases where people convicted of aggravated assaultreceive intermittent or non-custodial sentences. There are cases where people convicted ofassault causing bodily harm receive significant jail sentences. These cases illustrate the principlethat sentencing is an individual process.

[35] Mr. Murphy relied on several cases in support of his submission that a non-custodialsentence was appropriate. I will mention some of them. R. v. Shahcheraghi, 2017 ONSC 574 issuch a case. Mr. Shahcheraghi was convicted of aggravated assault. He was a bouncer at adowntown bar. He and another bouncer ejected the victim, a drunk patron. He punched thevictim multiple times and smashed his head into a glass door. He injured the victim’s head andface, including an injury near his eye. The victim made a full recovery. He had no lastingeffects or injury and was back to his regular routine quickly. He was clearly drunk when ejectedfrom the bar, and physical force was required to remove him. Mr. Shahcheraghi was a firstoffender. He put himself through school, earning bachelor’s and master’s degrees. Morgan J.
imposed a suspended sentence and three years probation.

[36] In R. v. Fensom, 2016 ONSC 4709, the offender was convicted of assault causing bodilyharm. The circumstances were similar to those in R. v. Shahcheraghi. The offender was abouncer in a bar. The victim was a drunk patron who had to be ejected by force. The patron’sbehaviour may have constituted provocation. Mr. Fensom kicked him several times. He was afirst time offender and had pro-social antecedents. The violence was not gratuitous and thevictim, who initiated the situation, recovered fully. The use of excessive force was a momentary

[31] Assault causing bodily harm carries a penalty of a maximum of ten years whenprosecuted by indictment.

10

[37] In R. v. Thomas, 2012 ONSC 6653 Horkins J. of the Ontario Court of Justice found theoffender guilty of assault causing bodily harm. Mr. Thomas was an off-duty police officer whowas driving with his girlfriend and daughters. Another driver cut him off and drove in anexceptionally aggressive manner. Mr. Thomas flashed his badge, pulled the other driver over,and attempted to arrest her. There then ensued an altercation as Mr. Thomas placed her underarrest. The trial judge convicted him on the basis that he used excessive force in the course ofthat arrest. Horkins J. sentenced Mr. Thomas to a 90-day intermittent sentence. On appeal,Code. J. reduced the sentence to a non-custodial disposition on the grounds that this was anexceptional case involving a respected police officer with good antecedents.

[38] In R. v. Dinney, 2012 ONCA 497 the offender and his friends were drunk in theentertainment district in Hamilton after closing time. They became involved in a number offights with others. Bouncers attempted to intervene. Mr. Dinney left the area and returned. Hethen sucker-punched the victim. The victim collapsed, struck his head on the pavement, andsuffered serious head injuries. Mr. Dinney told the police that he hit the complainant with hishardest punch. The trial judge sentenced him to six months. To use the words of the Court ofAppeal, she considered his “relative youth, his unblemished record at the time of the offence, hissubsequent expression of remorse and the fact that the assault involved a single blow.” This caseobviously has some important features that are similar to the facts in this case.

[39] In R. v. Samson, 2015 ONSC 523 the victim and the offender were both drunk. They hadan argument that escalated into a fight. There was provocation as the victim had harassed him allthrough the evening. The offender punched the unconscious victim several times. He thenbecame concerned that he might have truly injured the victim. He placed the victim in therecovery position and helped him, with others, to a nearby vehicle to take him to the hospital.
He apologized to the victim, as he knew the fight had gone too far. He also pleaded guilty. Hewas evidently very remorseful.
It was his first offence, he was young, and he had a verypositive pre-sentence report. LaFrance-Cardinal J. imposed a four-month conditional sentence.
The accused was originally arraigned on an indictment but then re-arraigned on informationwhere the Crown proceeded summarily. Without in any way commenting on the propriety ofthat procedure in the Superior Court, the obvious point of doing that was to permit a conditionalsentence. Under s. 742.1(e)(i) of the Criminal Code a conditional sentence is not available foroffences prosecuted by indictment where the maximum penalty is ten years imprisonment.
Assault causing bodily harm under s. 267(b) of the Criminal Code is a hybrid offence.

[40] Mr. Murphy relies on my own sentencing decision in R. v. Gugaruban, 2013 ONSC
3243. The victim and the offender were close friends. The offender was married to the victim’sfirst cousin. A family dispute escalated and resulted in the offender throwing a punch at thevictim. The victim’s orbital bone was fractured but he made a full recovery. A jury rejected adefence of self-defence. The offender was evidently quite remorseful and regretted his actions,even as he testified in self-defence. He had throughout wanted to heal the family breach – as did

lapse. When the victim left, and then re-entered briefly, the offender did not pursue and left himalone. Quigley J. sentenced him to a conditional discharge and a term of probation.

11

[41] Ms. Goldenberg relied on a series of cases where significant custodial sentences wereimposed. Most of them involved convictions for aggravated assault after a trial. The highestsentence was 3 years for a “sucker punch” with serious injuries: R. v. Brethour, 2011 ONSC
1677. She also relied on R. v. Rai, 2013 BCSC 1826. The offender in that case received, after aguilty plea, a 21-month sentence for another “sucker punch” where the victim was seriouslyinjured and lost sight in one eye.

[42] In R. v. Desgagne, 2013 ONSC 6319 the offender pleaded guilty to assault causing bodilyharm. The offender and the victim had an argument over rent money. The offender struck thevictim with a “massive punch”.
The victim had little memory of the incident. He suffered aserious and permanent brain injury. He could no longer work and could not live unaided. Theoffender agreed that he had not acted in self-defence and that he had used excessive force. Hewas 51 years old and without a criminal record. He had an alcohol problem and was ondisability as a result of a work injury. He had also abused other substances over the years. Heexpressed great remorse and embarrassment. Ratushny J. sentenced him to 8 months in jail andtwo years probation after the guilty plea.
6. Mitigating and Aggravating Factors

[43] In my view the main aggravating factor in this case is the violent and unprovoked natureof the assault on Mr. Runge.

[44] I also find it slightly aggravating that Mr. Mikasinovic has a criminal record. They wereconvictions largely accumulated at a young age and he has done much to turn his life around. I
give little or no weight to the youth convictions. I do, however, find it aggravating that two ofhis convictions are for assault and assault causing bodily harm. That is tempered by the fact thathe received a suspended sentence and probation for both convictions. The “gap” principle playsa role as well in mitigating the criminal record.

[45] Mr. Mikasinovic attempted to apologize to Mr. Runge and his family. In his attempt heexpressed remorse and indicated that the jury’s verdict had made him think carefully about whathe did. I do not accept that in the circumstances of this case that Mr. Mikasinovic’s apology toMr. Runge and the Runge family is a mitigating factor. I found it contrived, like his trialtestimony. I am aware that Mr. Mikasinovic expressed remorse in the pre-sentence report andsays that he takes responsibility for his actions as a result of the jury’s verdict. Unfortunately,that is at odds with Mr. Mikasinovic’s attempt in his testimony to portray himself as a victimrather than a victimizer. I had the benefit of watching both his demeanour on the stand and hisactions on the videotapes. It is very unlikely that he suddenly changed his views. It is muchmore likely that Mr. Mikasinovic, who is plainly very intelligent, understood that an expressionof remorse would go further on sentencing than a refusal to accept the jury’s verdict. My

the victim, who wrote to the Court asking that the offender be treated leniently. I imposed a 90day intermittent sentence. In my respectful view, the circumstances in that case were verydifferent from the circumstances here.

12

[46] That said, I do not find that an insincere apology is an aggravating factor. I simplycannot take the attempt to apologize into account.
Mr. Mikasinovic appears to be withoutremorse – except for himself, unfortunately. I do hope, however, that he will gain insight intohis behaviour.

[47] There are, of course, very important mitigating factors in this case that I must and do takeinto account. Mr. Mikasinovic had troubles with the law as a younger man. Some of hischaracter references noted the steps that he took to right himself. He has apparently beeninvolved in the St. Joseph Ride for Cancer and other charitable fundraising initiatives. Beleaveis sponsoring a program to discourage youth impaired driving and marijuana consumption. He isinvolved with that program. Mr. Mikasinovic also submitted a volume containing numerouscharacter references. I carefully reviewed these documents. Several business associates spokeof his integrity, intelligence, and generosity. His many friends appear to have taken a verystrong interest in him. They also speak of his character and his integrity, as well as hishelpfulness when they have needed assistance. Ultimately, Mr. Mikasinovic is a man who hasachieved business and social success, which, I believe, he will likely continue to achieve.
7. Ancillary Orders

[48] A DNA order will be made in this case as this is a primary designated offence. Therewill be an order under s.109 of the Criminal Code prohibiting Mr. Mikasinovic from possessingany weapons for 10 years. There will be an order pursuant to s. 743.21 of the Criminal Codeprohibiting communication between Mr. Mikasinovic and Mr. Runge and his family.
8. Final Decision

[49] This was a difficult case. It was the second trial, the first having ended in a hung jury. I
had the opportunity to observe all the main participants at length. It was obvious that it wasemotional and difficult for everyone concerned.

[50] Despite Mr. Murphy’s skilful submissions and admirable zeal on behalf of his client, I
respectfully disagree that a non-custodial sentence is appropriate. I distinguish this case from the
“bouncer” cases where offenders have received non-custodial sentences. Furthermore, virtuallyall the other cases where the court imposed non-custodial or intermittent sentences involveddisputes that were provoked in some way by the injured party. That is not the case here. I alsofind that an intermittent sentence would send the wrong message about after-hours violence in ornear the Entertainment District of our city. I also find that a sentence of 90 days or less is simplyinsufficient to denounce the gratuitous violence and resulting serious injury in this case.

observations of him indicate that he has the wit, the sophistication, and the intelligence tounderstand how he should portray himself in this situation. I believe that it is the same for hisexpression of remorse to Ms. Freedman. His expressions of remorse are at odds with the personI observed on the stand.

[51] This case is entirely different. Mr. Mikasinovic initiated the confrontation. He wasaggressive and hostile. He could have backed off and de-escalated. Instead, he went after Mr.Runge and punched him when Mr. Runge was reeling backwards and defenseless. Indeed, Mr.Mikasinovic testified that he punched Mr. Runge “as hard has he could”. Mr. Mikasinovicliterally went in for the kill – not in the sense that attempted to murder Mr. Runge, but in thesense that he was determined to incapacitate a helpless and staggering victim. Self-defenceplayed no role at any time. Dr. Smith testified that the force required to cause the type of braininjury suffered by Mr. Runge would have to be considerable. Mr. Mikasinovic’s actions wereunprovoked and disproportionate to the circumstances.

[52] I am inclined to agree with Mr. Mikasinovic’s character references that his earliertroubles with the law were the result of youthful bad judgment and should not be given a greatdeal of weight. I also agree that Mr. Mikasinovic’s successful attempts to turn himself aroundand have a successful business career are positive and mitigating and I do take that into account.
I also take into account that he has adult convictions for assault and assault causing bodily harm.
I am aware that he received a suspended sentence for both, and that he was still quite young.
Although those convictions do not carry a great deal of weight, it is troubling that he findshimself before the courts again for a violent offence.

[53] Ms. Goldenberg, like Mr. Murphy, made very able submissions in favour of her position.
Respectfully, however, I am unable to agree that a penitentiary sentence is appropriate in thiscase.

[54] I find the following comment from the Court of Appeal in R. v. Yusuf, supra, veryhelpful:
Although we do not think that the trial judge failed to give proper consideration tothe jury's verdict (the jury acquitted on the wounding and convicted on theincluded offence of assault bodily harm), we are satisfied that the sentence isentirely justified on any view of the conviction. Clearly, the appellant struck thevictim in the face once or more with real force. Blinded, she stumbled away andfell down the stairs. The appellant is properly held responsible for all of thevictim's injuries even if the blow or blows he struck did not "wound" the victimwithin the meaning of the Criminal Code

[55] In my respectful view, the most useful cases are Dinney and Desgagnes, supra. Inimposing sentence I take into account Mr. Mikasinovic’s many good character references, hisvery good prospects for rehabilitation, and his pro-social and successful life since his moretroubled youth. I also take into account the fact that some measure of specific deterrence isrequired given what seems to be something of an anger management problem. Finally, I alsotake into account the terrible injuries to the victim, the need to denounce this particular violentoffence, and the need to deter like-minded others in the future.

13

[56] In my view, an appropriate sentence in this case is 14 months in the reformatory. I alsoimpose two years probation. The terms of the probation will be for Mr. Mikasinovic to keep thepeace and be of good behaviour, continue to take counselling as required by his probationofficer, to provide whatever waivers the probation officer requires to monitor his progress, and todo 50 hours of community service.

R.F. Goldstein J.
Released: May 25, 2017

14

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN

– and –

NEDELJKO MIKASINOVIC

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT ON SENTENCING
R.F. Goldstein J.

CITATION: R. v. Mikasinovic, 2017 ONSC 3192
COURT FILE NO.: CR-16-10000760-0000
DATE: 20170525

