CITATION: R. v. Fairbarn, 2017 ONSC 3101
COURT FILE NO.: CR-15-4125
DATE: 20170519

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
– and –
TRACY FAIRBARN

Applicant )

Sébastien Lafrance, for the Crown

Self-Represented Applicant

HEARD: May 15, 2017

RULING ON ROWBOTHAM APPLICATION
EDWARDS J.:
Overview

[1]

Ms. Fairbarn seeks an order for state-funded counsel.
She had previously beenunsuccessful in what is commonly referred to as a Rowbotham application. On June 10,2016, Mullins J. released her Ruling denying Ms. Fairbarn’s Rowbotham application, butin so doing stated at para. 20 that her Ruling was “without prejudice…to a furtherapplication on a better evidentiary basis should her circumstances change”.

[2]

Ms. Fairbarn is charged with nine counts which include charges of conspiracy, forgery,fraud and trafficking in fentanyl. Ms. Fairbarn is charged with two other individuals.
There are a total of 118 counts on the indictment. The trial will be anything butuncomplicated.

The Facts

[3]

Ms. Fairbarn is alleged to have conspired to traffic in fentanyl between June 1, 2013 andDecember 4, 2013.

[4]

Ms. Fairbarn applied for legal aid and was turned down. She appealed a decision denyingher legal aid and she pursued an appeal. In the decision of Maureen Murphy, Senior Legal

ONTARIO

Although the applicant states that she has been separated for more than oneyear, there is no verification confirming this either in the form of a separationagreement or court documents. In the absence of verification that the applicantand her spouse formally separated in January, 2014, I have concluded that theapplicant’s separation is not bona fide and the applicant’s spouse should beconsidered part of the applicant’s family unit. His income and assets areconsidered available to assist the applicant with legal fees.

[5]

In dealing with Ms. Fairbarn’s first application for a Rowbotham order, Mullins J. stated inpara. 16 of her Reasons that she was satisfied that representation by counsel was aprerequisite to a fair trial. It had previously been conceded by the Crown that Ms. Fairbarnhad exhausted the process to obtain legal aid funding, and that if she was convicted shelikely faced a term of imprisonment.

[6]

As for the question of whether or not Ms. Fairbarn was indigent, the evidence beforeMullins J. was to the effect that she earned $15,000 annually and that she had no assets. Itwas also noted in para. 18 of her Reasons that Ms. Fairbarn’s husband had an income ofbetween $80,000 and $100,000 per year and that he had a “legal obligation to support hiswife and that she has an entitlement to support”.

Position of Ms. Fairbarn

[7]

Ms. Fairbarn self-represented herself on this application. She had filed an affidavit towhich was appended a separation agreement that she had entered into with her husband,which is dated March 31, 2017. The separation agreement provides for child and spousalsupport. The agreement provides that Mr. Fairbarn will pay the monthly rent of thematrimonial home in the sum of $1,400, as well as the utilities “in lieu of child and spousalsupport”. Ms. Fairbarn agreed to pay for the food for herself and the children, as well asany extra-curricular activities for the children.

[8]

There is no evidence before the Court that would suggest that the separation agreement isanything other than an arms-length transaction entered into between Mr. and Ms. Fairbarn.
Whether or not the child and spousal support provisions would pass scrutiny in a FamilyLaw proceeding where the parties will have to make financial disclosure is not for me todetermine. The evidence on this Rowbotham application, however, is such that I amsatisfied that the separation agreement does provide for child and spousal support that, inessence, provides for the subsistence of Ms. Fairbarn and her children. It certainly doesnot provide Ms. Fairbarn with any additional support that would enable her to retain legalcounsel in these proceedings.

[9]

In Ms. Fairbarn’s most recent affidavit she also deposes to her present financial situation.
At the time of her initial Rowbotham application Ms. Fairbarn was employed, and as noted

Counsel, Appeals, Legal Aid Ontario, dated May 29, 2015, the appeal was denied in parton the following basis:

in the Reasons of Mullins J. she had an annual income of approximately $15,000. Sincethe hearing of the application before Mullins J., Ms. Fairbarn deposes in her recentaffidavit that she is no longer employed where she was at the time of the hearing beforeMullins J., and that her only source of income now is unemployment insurance benefits inthe amount of $512 bi-weekly. Ms. Fairbarn goes on to depose that she has no savings, nordoes she have any assets. She deposes that she does not own a car and that her chequingaccount has been in overdraft since 2016. The essence of Ms. Fairbarn’s argument is thatshe does not have any financial means by which she can retain legal counsel to assist herwith respect to the charges that are presently before the Court. She indicates that “…I
understand that the cost of my trial, even at discounted legal aid rates is expected to be inexcess of $40,000. I have no way to obtain this amount of money”.

[10] Crown counsel did not cross examine Ms. Fairbarn on her most recent affidavit. Herevidence regarding her marital situation, her income and her assets is thereforeunchallenged.
Position of the Crown

[11] Crown counsel acknowledges that the first two parts of the Rowbotham test have been metas a result of the decision of Mullins J.; specifically that Ms. Fairbarn has been denied legalaid and that representation by counsel is essential to a fair trial. The only issue from theCrown’s perspective is that Ms. Fairbarn has not satisfied the question of whether she isindigent and, therefore, unable to retain counsel utilizing her income and assets.

[12] It was argued by Crown counsel that this Court may be estopped by the decision of MullinsJ., and that her decision is res judicata. In that regard, I was referred to a decision ofWright J. in R. v. Daniel Innocente, 2002 NSSC 091, where the principle of res judicata inthe context of a Rowbotham application is discussed. I agree with the comments of WrightJ. at para. 7, where it is noted:
I am not prepared to go so far as to say on this application that res judicatacan never be available to the Crown under any circumstances. I think theapplication of the principle has to be considered in the context of the facts ofthe individual case. I am mindful that counsel have been unable to refer thecourt to any authority where it has been judicially recognized that the Crowncan avail itself of that defence. Nevertheless, as I indicated in my exchangeswith counsel this afternoon, if this were a case where Mr. Innocente wasattempting to bring a second Rowbotham application which involved the verysame parties, and very same issue based on the very same facts, that is to say,a position unchanged from that which was before Justice Robertson, then I
would agree that he would not be entitled to re-litigate the same application.
Analysis

[13] In my view there are, in fact, new facts presented to this Court as a result of Ms. Fairbarn’smost recent affidavit to which is attached the separation agreement. There has, been amaterial change in circumstance from two perspectives. First of all, Ms. Fairbarn has losther position of employment that she had at the time when she appeared before Mullins J.
Her only source of income now is unemployment insurance benefits. As well, a formalseparation agreement has been entered into between Mr. and Ms. Fairbarn, dated March31, 2017, in which the parties have agreed to child and spousal support. The child andspousal support provisions, in my view, provide Ms. Fairbarn and their children withsubsistence living that do not avail Ms. Fairbarn of any additional income that would beavailable to retain legal counsel for these proceedings.

[14] The onus is on Ms. Fairbarn to establish that she does not have the financial ability toretain counsel. I agree with Crown counsel’s submission that Ms. Fairbarn could havedone a better job in providing financial documentation to the Court that evidences what shedeposes to in her affidavit, specifically that she has no assets or income and that her bankaccount is in overdraft. I do, however, take note of the fact that the Crown did not seekleave to cross-examine Ms. Fairbarn on her affidavit. Her evidence with respect to herfinancial wherewithal is therefore unchallenged. The separation agreement, in my view,makes abundantly clear that the support Mr. Fairbarn is presently providing to his wife andchildren only allows for bare subsistence, i.e. a roof over their head. There is nothing thatMr. Fairbarn is contributing by way of child and spousal support that would be available tofund Ms. Fairbarn’s defence.

[15] I am satisfied that on the basis of the evidence now presented to the Court; evidence thatwas not available at the time the matter initially came before Mullins J., that Ms. Fairbarnis indigent and without an ability to obtain private counsel to defend her with respect to thecharges pending before the Court.

[16] I therefore find on the balance of probabilities that Ms. Fairbarn cannot have a fair trialunless she is provided with financial assistance which is necessary to retain counsel.
Without the necessary funding for legal counsel, a continued prosecution of this caseagainst Mr. Fairbarn will result in a violation of her s. 7 and s. 11(d) Charter rights. Theonly remedy for this Charter breach is to enter a conditional stay of the proceedingspursuant to s. 24(1) of the Charter. The conditional stay shall remain in effect until suchtime as the Attorney General provides the necessary funding for the retention of legalcounsel to represent Ms. Fairbarn at her rapidly approaching trial.

[17] On the assumption that the necessary funding is in fact provided, thus lifting theconditional stay, I have made it abundantly clear to Ms. Fairbarn that any counsel that sheintends to retain pursuant to this order must be available for the commencement of trial aspreviously scheduled.

Justice M.L. Edwards

Released: May 19, 2017

CITATION: R. v. Fairbarn, 2017 ONSC 3101

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
– and –
TRACY FAIRBARN
ApplicantRULING ON ROWBOTHAM APPLICATION
Justice M.L. EdwardsReleased: May 19, 2017

ONTARIO

