CITATION: R. v. Azzam, 2017 ONSC 3178
COURT FILE NO.: 5934
DATE: 20170526

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
Her Majesty the Queen

– and –
Danny George Azzam

Respondent )
Applicant )

Brian White, for the Respondent

Philip Casey, for the Applicant

HEARD: In Writing

GARSON J.

Introduction

[1]

Danny Azzam (the “applicant”) was convicted of first degree murder on April 4, 2004 inthe stabbing death of his step-mother in 2001. He stabbed her with a five-inch kitchenknife a total of 30 times, including 18 wounds to the chest after consuming alcohol andTHC.

[2]

The applicant’s father passed away in 1999. He became increasingly concerned abouthow his step-mother was spending the inheritance and his entitlement to any of the estate.

[3]

On the date of the murder, the applicant arranged to meet his step-mother behind thecommunity centre and when she did not respond to his concerns, he began to stab herrepeatedly to the chest.

[4]

The applicant has applied under s. 745.6 of the Criminal Code for a reduction in his 25
year parole ineligibility period. I have been designated by the Chief Justice of theSuperior Court of Justice to screen the application and make a determination as towhether it shall be considered by a jury.

ONTARIO

[5]

The test, as set out in s. 745.61 of the Criminal Code requires that the applicantdemonstrate on a balance of probabilities, that there exists a substantial likelihood that theapplication will succeed.

[6]

For the reasons that follow, I conclude that the applicant has not shown, on a balance ofprobabilities that the application has a substantial likelihood of success at this time.

Materials Filed

[7]

[8]

[9]

The applicant filed an affidavit sworn August 15, 2016, with several attachments 1 relatingto his conduct while incarcerated. I will make reference to much of this material duringthe course of my Reasons.
The Crown filed extensive materials, including a series of exhibits from the trial and ahelpful timeline highlighting the various misconduct citations against the applicant duringhis time in custody.
Correctional Service of Canada filed a Parole Eligibility Summary Report, datedFebruary 14, 2017, alongside various assessments and performance reports and theoriginal trial transcript.2

The Test

[10] Section 745.63(1)(a)-(e) of the Criminal Code sets out the criteria that a judge shallconsider in determining whether the applicant has met the “substantial likelihood that theapplication will succeed” threshold. I need not weigh each factor equally. The focus ison changes, if any, since the initial sentence was imposed.

[11] In R. v. Jenkins, 2014 ONSC 3969, 114 W.C.B. (2d) 527, Pomerance J.A. provides somehelpful guidance on the central points or test to be relied upon in interpreting theinterplay between the concepts of proof on a “balance of probabilities” that a “substantiallikelihood” exists that the application will succeed. These points are summarized at para.
14 as follows:
a. A substantial likelihood of success is a more stringent standardthan a reasonable prospect of success, though it is difficult toconcretely define the difference between the two;

1

These include a Millhaven Corrections Plan and a Profile Report, dated July 12, 2004 (“MCP”), PsychologicalRisk Assessments of Dr. Jacqueline Cimbura, dated October 31, 2008 and Dr. W. Loza dated May 6, 2014; aWarkworth Institution Correctional Plan dated May 7, 2015 (which includes excerpts from earlier WarkworthCorrectional plans in 2010-2012 and 2014 as well as from Kingston Penitentiary in 2006-2007) (“WCP”), anOntario Secondary School Diploma and other Awards and Certificates and various letters of reference.
2
These included Psychological Assessment Reports of October 31, 2008 and May 16, 2014; Performance Reportsregarding (i) the Reasoning and Rehabilitation Program (2006), (ii) Anger and Emotions Management (2007), (iii)
National Substance Abuse Program (2011), and (iv) Aboriginal Basic Healing Program (2012). The applicant alsocompleted and filed a Relapse Prevention Worksheet.

2

3

c. The judge must consider the broad discretion of the jury to grantclemency. The jury is to consider the five statutory criteria, but isnot to apply any specific legal standard in assessing whether theperiod parole ineligibility should be reduced;d. Given the breadth of the jury’s discretion, the role of the judge isnot so much to assess whether an application will succeed, butrather, whether it should succeed. As I explained in para. 46 of mydecision on the constitutional issue:
…in faint hope cases, it is always open to the jury, as amatter of law, to allow an application. This flows from thebreadth of the jury’s discretion. The question for thescreening judge is not whether it is open to the jury toreduce parole ineligibility. That option is available in everycase. Nor is the question what a jury will actually do in agiven case. That requires a level of prescience that nojudge can claim. What we are really asking as judges iswhether a jury should allow the application, but Parliamenthas stemmed the tide of cases that will make it to that stage.
It has built a judicial dam at the front end of the process.
e. Under the old “reasonable prospect” test, the question was whetherthere was some evidence on which a reasonable jury couldproperly reduce the offender’s parole ineligibility period. Underthe new test, the question is whether there is evidence on which areasonable jury, acting judiciously, would be substantially likely toreduce the offender’s parole ineligibility period.
The Factors ConsideredThe Character of the Applicant

[12] I must not only consider the antecedents of the applicant as they existed leading up to thehomicide but also any changes to that character that have emerged since incarceration,including the applicant’s remorse and his acceptance of responsibility for the offence.

b. In applying the standard, the judge must take into account that,while screening is based on a paper review, the jury will bepresented with oral testimony, which tends to be more evocativethan documentary evidence;

4

[13] The applicant’s affidavit expresses remorse for his actions. In addition to characterizinghis own behaviour as selfish and callous, he acknowledges the grief and suffering hisactions have caused to the family of the victim. 3

in sharp contrast to his initial lying to the police about the offence when questioned.
However, after his arrest, he confesses to the offences. Nonetheless, throughout his trialand appeal and continuing to when first incarcerated, he maintained that the offence wasnot pre-meditated.5

[15] A series of reference letters from a priest, a correctional program officer and severalcorrectional employees speak to the applicant’s strong work-ethic, intelligence, pro-socialbehaviour, and kindness.

[16] The applicant displays a lengthy history of substance abuse tracing back to age 10 or 11
when he began drinking and expanding to marijuana use by the age of 15.

[17] At the commencement of his sentence and for many years thereafter, the authoritiesdocumented incidents of possession of brew-like substances and unauthorized pills.6
his credit, the applicant completed programs in an effort to combat these addictions.

To

[18] The applicant showed many signs of depression coupled with a history of self-mutilationand at least one attempted suicide.7 He began acting out at age 10 and was subsequentlysent to an “institution” as a result of his behaviour at age 13. He left the family at age 15.
He displayed anger issues as a teenager up to and including the time of the offence. Asof 2015, the applicant appears to be coping with his depressive symptoms. His time incustody appears to have tempered his anger issues and he is described as a “polite,cooperative and relaxed person”.8
His early negative attitude shows significantimprovement over time, as his initial plan assessed his anger as highly problematic andhis 2015 plan identified him as requiring “a low need for improvement”. 9

[19] Prior to this offence, the applicant possessed a minor record for the offences of Fail toAppear and Possession of Break-In Instruments.
Applicants Conduct While Serving the Sentence

[20] The records provided to me demonstrate that the applicant has made significant progressin a number of areas during his years of incarceration. These include:
3

SeeSee5
See6
See7
See8
See9
See4

WCP at p. 10 which reflects the applicant’s genuine demonstration of remorse.
also WCP at p. 10 that indicates that the applicant “demonstrates a high level of accountability for his actions”.
MPR at p.1
p. 4 of the WCP
p. 5 of the 2008 Psychological Risk Assessmentp. 10 of the WCP (2015)
p. 5-6

[14] The applicant’s affidavit suggests that he accepts responsibility for his actions.4 This is

10

(i)

Programs Completed: The applicant has attended AA meetings toaddress his addiction issues, completed his high school diploma,attended several programs to combat addiction and emotionalinstability10 , and participated in a number of voluntary programsdealing with peer education, first-aid and alternatives to violence.

(ii)

General Attitude:
The applicant was initially identified asdisplaying negative attitudes towards the correctional system.
However, with time, he is now seen as polite, courteous andrespectful and has made marked improvements in this regard. Heappears highly motivated to succeed in his correctional plan and hasnot been identified as being involved in any organized crime orrelated issues. He has made substantial progress in dealing with hisanger management issues.

(iii)

Substance Abuse:
The applicant’s early misconduct whileincarcerated dealt primarily with addiction and substance abuseissues. Although still classified as requiring a “moderate need forimprovement”11 , he has made some progress in this regard.

(iv)

Employment: The applicant has held a variety of employmentpositions while incarcerated and acquired multiple skillscertification coupled with very strong performance reviews.

(v)

Institutional Misconduct: The applicant has not done so well in thiscategory. As of 2008, the applicant had 9 institutional chargesrelating to brew-making, unauthorized possession of pills andpositive urinalyses results, of which 5 were deemed serious. 12 By2015, he had acquired a total of 20 institutional charges, includingpossession of over 700 loose pills and a positive urinalyses result in2013 for cocaine and morphine.

(vi)

Risk-assessment: In a 2008 report, the applicant was identified asbeing in the low-moderate-moderate range for general recidivismand the moderate range for violent recidivism. By 2015, a series oftests concluded that he was in the low-moderate risk for recidivismover a 2 year span and was part of a statistical group of which 20%
will likely commit indictable offences after release.13 The applicantcurrently possesses the skills to cope with his depressive symptoms
(such symptoms being rather common for persons serving life

Reason and Rehabilitation – 2006, Anger and Emotions – 2007, National Substance Abuse Program – 2011, andAboriginal Basic healing – 2012
11
See WCP 2015 at p. 4
12
See MPR at p. 4
13
See WCP at p.12

5

6

(vii)

Outside Community Involvement/Relationships: The applicant hasa supportive family and speaks and visits regularly with his oldersister, aunts, uncles, cousins and family friends. The applicant hasrecently married a woman who has a daughter. In light of hisconsistent and strong employment, his positive community contactsand his participation in recreational activities, the applicant’s “reintegration potential” into the community has been assessed atmedium15 (an improvement from an initial assessment of low).

The Nature of the Offence

[21] As earlier noted, the actions of the applicant were quite shocking and horrendous. Theapplicant stabbed the victim a total of 30 times. There were numerous defensive woundsto the victim’s left forearm and hand. The appellant rode a borrowed bicycle to theparking lot of the community centre which he had requested the victim to attend. As shesat in the driver’s seat, he inflicted 30 knife wounds, 18 of which were to her chest, with11 penetrating the chest and vital organs.

[22] After the killing, the appellant threw the knife in a nearby field. He then rode the bicycleto his step-mother’s home where he hid his shoes in a hedge behind her house and hid hisbloodstained clothing in a bedroom and in the garage.

[23] In the early morning hours after the killing his girlfriend, initially, and the applicant,subsequently, telephoned the police to report the victim as missing.

[24] Both at trial and during the appeal, the applicant took the position that the murder was notplanned and deliberate but rather the product of provocation combined with substanceabuse.

[25] The applicant spoke to his girlfriend months before the offence about wanting to kill thevictim. His girlfriend testified to this effect. There was also evidence that the applicantintentionally caused the victim to ingest an overdose of sleeping pills in an earlier butunsuccessful attempt to cause her death.

[26] The applicant devised an alibi prior to the commission of the offence.

14

See p. 9-10 and the results of the Statistical Information on Recidivism Scale (SIR) and the Self-AppraisalQuestionnaire (SAQ) and the Level of Supervision Inventory (LSI-R)
15
See WCP p. 11

sentences).
The reports suggest the applicant shows anunderstanding of the elements of his offence cycle and has taken thenecessary steps to address them through programming. 14

7

was between 2 and 4 years of age until her death. They did not have a good relationshipwhich seemed to only worsen after the death of the applicant’s father (and the thoughtsby the applicant that the victim had something to do with his death). Money issuesrelating to the estate and the spending patterns of the victim appear to have been drivingfactors in the actions of the applicant.

[28] The applicant was relatively young at the time of the offence (21).
Victim Information

[29] Although victim input was sought for this application by way of a daughter of thedeceased, she declined any further input.

Other Relevant Considerations

[30] There is no other information that I consider relevant.
Discussion

[31] The starting point for any discussion is to understand the purpose of s. 745.6 which is tore-examine the earlier sentencing decision in light of new information or circumstanceswhich could not have been known or available at the time. In other words, I must focuson any substantive changes to the applicant’s situation that may justify a deduction fromthe original penalty: see R. v. Swietlinski, (1994) 3 S.C.R. 481 (S.C.C.), at para. 14.

[32] There can be little doubt that the gatekeeping function at this juncture is intended toscreen out frivolous applications and protect families and society from needless andpainful hearings that will likely end in failure for the applicant. Only meritoriousapplicants should come before juries.

[33] The stringent test places a high burden on the applicant and is intended to ensure that anydepartures from the mandatory life sentence for first degree murder without paroleeligibility for 25 years are warranted.

[34] There are many positives to the conduct of the applicant while serving his sentence.
These include:
(i)

his steady progression from maximum to medium to minimum securityinstitutions over time;

(ii)

his current assessment as a low-moderate risk for recidivism;

(iii) his successful completion of a series of programs;

[27] The victim was the step-mother of the applicant and raised the applicant from the time he

8
(iv) his consistent and strong employment experiences while incarcerated; and
(v)

his expanded and positive family support, including his recent marriage.

(i)

an extensive history of institutional behavioral concerns continuing toMarch 201616 ; and

(ii)

despite some positive efforts to deal with substance abuse issues, a numberof failed urinalysis tests, including as recently as March 2016 where hetested positive for the presence of THC. 17

[36] There can be little doubt that overall, the applicant has done very well in prison. Hismany improvements and his current motivation for bringing this application (his newwife and her daughter) are commendable. Yet this is but one of the factors to consider.

[37] All first degree murders are inherently brutal, shocking and horrifying. This one is nodifferent. There are a number of specific factors I take into account including:
(i)

prior to the murder, the applicant deliberately caused the victim to ingest anoverdose of sleeping pills;

(ii)

using a six-inch kitchen knife, the applicant inflicted 30 knife wounds whileshe sat in her vehicle trapped by her seatbelt. Eighteen of the wounds wereto her chest and the balance were of a defensive nature. The pathologist attrial testified that it would have taken some minutes before the victimsuccumbed to her wounds;

(iii) the applicant was described by a witness as leaving the scene making soundsof a celebratory nature;

16

June, 2001 [EMDC]: An unknown pill hidden in a 35 mm film canister; Sept. 3 rd , 2004 [Kingston Penitentiary]:
Possession of pills; Dec. 15, 2005 [Kingston Penitentiary]: Seizure of 4 litres of “brew”; Jan. 3 rd , 2006 [KingstonPenitentiary]: Seizure of remnants of a brew-like substance; May 16th , 2006 [Kingston Penitentiary]: Failedurinalysis by testing positive for THC; Jan. 2nd , 2007 [Kingston Penitentiary]: Failed urinalysis by testing positivefor THC; October, 2010 [Warkworth Institution]: Found to be in possession of over 600 Tylenol and Motrin tablets;Feb 5th , 2011 [Warkworth Institution]: Found to be in possession of 129 orange pills and an additional 638 whitepills; Feb 27th , 2013 [Warkworth Institution]: Failed urinalysis where the applicant stated that he had taken anotherinmates Tylenol 3, and tested positive for codeine/morphine; Aug 5 th , 2015 [Warkworth Institution]: loose pillsfound along with a debt list and other contraband; March 2016 [Warkworth Institution]: Failed urinalysis where theapplicant stated that he had taken prescription heartburn medication, but later admitted that the positive test for THC
was a “slip” on his part.
17
The Parole Eligibility Summary Report at p. 17 references a 2014 Psycholog ical Risk Assessment of Dr. Loza thatspeaks to the applicant benefiting from a “long-term substance abuse program both institutionally and in thecommunity when he eventually achieves a conditional release”.

[35] These are to be balanced against some negatives including:

9

(v)

the continually changing story about his role in the murder from the first tothe second police interview and from the first Criminal Profile Report
(2004) to a later Program Performance Report (2012) where he finallyacknowledges an element of planning and deliberation to the murder.

[38] Although I accept that he now acknowledges his responsibility for his role in this offence,both the timing and the evolution of this admission are concerning. His initial story attrial was that of provocation coupled with intoxication. It later changes (2004) to includehaving “blacked out” at the time of the stabbing, and by 2012, introduces the concept of aplanned murder seeking revenge for the victim’s perceived role in the death of his father.
This theme of premeditation extends to a 2014 comment to Dr. Loza where he admits tohaving thought about killing his step-mother for two years and then decided to act uponthose thoughts. This latest version is a significant change from his earlier factualaccounts and must be assessed in this context.

[39] Effectively, I am required to put myself in the shoes of a prospective juror, applying thesame test and relying on the same factors that a jury would consider and attempting topredict the outcome.

[40] There is much that the applicant is to be commended for including his numerous andpositive steps towards rehabilitation coupled with his recent acceptance of responsibilityand expressions of remorse. I accept that he is a different and a better person than theone that appeared at trial.

[41] However, he remains a few steps short of the model prisoner. His institutional behavioralconcerns, particularly those relating to substance misuse or abuse, are concerning in lightof the role substance abuse played in his life at the time of the murder, and the linkbetween the applicant’s substance abuse and anger and violence.

[42] The law requires a critical analysis and evaluation of the nature of the offence. It is bothdifficult and unnerving to put the tragic loss of life along a continuum. The level ofplanning, the manipulation of the trust of the victim and the sheer terror suffered by thevictim make this a particularly brutal and despicable act.

[43] This was an out of character act by an individual who has now demonstrated manypositive changes to his life and contributed in a significant way to his prospects forrehabilitation. His progress has made his prospects of successfully being released andreintegrated into society more likely to happen. But not now.

[44] In MacMillan v. British Columbia (AG), 2015 BCSC 2298, 126 W.C.B. (2d) 479, thecourt dealt with a model inmate that had recently begun to accept full responsibility forhis actions (while previously placing a degree of blame on the victim) but nonetheless fellshort in his application under s. 745.6. Similarly, in R. v. Crick, 2012 ONSC 5695, 103

(iv) the planned alibi and the initial efforts to mislead the police by feigningconcern for the “missing victim” and hiding the incriminatory evidence; and

10

[45] His many positives are simply not sufficient to outweigh the excessive and extremedegree of violence reflected in the murder itself, coupled with his on-going struggles todeal with his substance abuse issues and extensive history of institutional misconduct.
The nature of this crime and the circumstances surrounding its commission are animportant factor for this court to consider.

[46] His various accounts of the events and his lies to both the police and the courts, adverselyaffect his reliability and his credibility.

[47] I am not convinced that he could convince twelve jurors on a balance of probabilities thathis parole ineligibility period should be reduced. That said his progress is commendableand I urge the applicant to remain on the path of improvement.

Conclusion

[48] Having carefully reviewed the evidence on the critical factors enumerated in s. 745.63 ofthe Code, I am not satisfied that the applicant has met the onus of proving on a balance ofprobabilities that there is a substantial likelihood that a unanimous jury would agree toaward the applicant with early parole eligibility. In the result, the application isdismissed.

[49] In accordance with s. 745.61(3)(a), and in light of the significant progress made by theapplicant to date, the applicant may make a further application after the expiration of fiveyears from the date of this decision.

“Justice M. A. Garson”
Justice M.A. GarsonReleased: May 26, 2017

W.C.B. (2d) 826, the applicant demonstrated good conduct during his incarceration andwas deemed a low risk to offend. However, due to the nature and circumstancessurrounding the commission of the crime and the failure to acknowledge responsibility
(and lack of remorse) the court denied the s. 745.6 application.

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
Her Majesty the QueenRespondent
-andDanny George AzzamApplicantREASONS FOR JUDGMENT

Justice M. A. GarsonReleased: May 26, 2017

CITATION: R. v. Azzam, 2017 ONSC 3178
COURT FILE NO.: 5934
DATE: 2017/0526

