CITATION: R. v. Strong, 2017 ONSC 3163
COURT FILE NO.: 107/16
DATE: 2017 05 24

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
– and –
ERIK STRONG

Christopher Bundy and WendyHoutmeyers, for the Crown

Ehsan Grebrai, for the Accused

HEARD: April 25, 2017

REASONS FOR SENTENCE
WOOLLCOMBE J.
A.

Introduction

[1]

Erik Strong is before me for the imposition of sentence.

[2]

On February 6, 2017, Mr. Strong entered a guilty plea before me to four

charges:
a. Trafficking in cannabis marihuana in an amount greater than 3
kilograms, contrary to s. 5(1) of the CDSA on September 11, 2014;b. Trafficking in cannabis marihuana in an amount greater than 3
kilograms, contrary to s. 5(1) of the CDSA on September 25, 2014;

ONTARIO

c. Conspiring with James Evans-O’Connell, Craig Jones and others totraffic in a controlled substance, to wit cannabis marihuana, contrary

November 24, 2014;d. Possessing proceeds of crime, to wit $53,832 in Canadian currency,knowing it was obtained directly or indirectly from the commission inCanada of an indictable offence, contrary to s. 354(1) of the CriminalCode, on or about November 24, 2014.

[3]

It was agreed that the facts supporting the guilty plea would be the

evidence adduced at his trial or as determined on the sentencing hearing.

[4]

Mr. Strong chose to plead not guilty to three further charges and had a

jury trial. On February 23, 2017, he was found guilty by the jury of one count ofpossession of a controlled substance, to wit: cannabis marihuana, in an amountgreater than three kilograms, for the purpose of trafficking, contrary to s. 5(2) ofthe Controlled Drugs and Services Act (“CDSA”). He was found not guilty of thetwo other charges.
B.

The Factsa) Circumstances of the Offences

[5]

I find the following to be the relevant facts in relation to the offences.

[6]

Mr. Strong was involved in the dangerous and violent business of drug

trafficking. He was a commercial wholesaler of marihuana. He was motivated bygreed and profit.

[7]

Mr. Strong began selling marihuana while in university. He continued as

a seller after university, at the retail level, selling small amounts at a time.

In

2012, his business resulted in him being violently attacked and hospitalized.

to s. 465(1) of the Criminal Code between October 28 and

Rather than turning away from this lifestyle, Mr. Strong appears to have beenmotivated to find an alternative, safer way to ply his trade.

He became a

from street level violence.

[8]

Mr. Strong’s business appears to have involved him receiving large

amounts of marihuana, storing it, and then selling it for a profit.

The evidence

before me, supported by Exhibit 3 on sentencing, is that Mr. Strong sold a largequantity of marihuana over the fall of 2014.

He had in his possession 40 pounds

of marihuana at 126 Simcoe Street, his “stash house”, at the time of his arrest onNovember 24, 2014.

[9]

The Crown suggests that it has proven that Mr. Strong either had or sold

at least 124 pounds of marihuana between September 11 and November 24,2014. I accept that this has been proven.

[10]

In terms of the value of the marihuana that Mr. Strong had or sold, the

Crown’s expert evidence was that a pound of marihuana was worth between
$2,000 and $3,000.

This means he had or sold at least $248,000 of marihuana

in that period in the fall of 2014. Sold at a gram or ounce level, the marihuanawould be worth more.

Suffice it to say, this was an enterprise that involved a

high value of marihuana and large amounts of money.

[11]

I accept that Mr. Strong was an organizer in this marihuana business. He

hired people such as Craig Jones to be his driver. He had the ability to obtainproduct from Mr. Jones when he wanted it. He talked about hiring other drivers.
He seemed to refer to people who worked for him in the interceptedconversations.

wholesaler of larger quantities of marihuana, a position in which he felt insulated

[12]

On his own evidence, Mr. Strong also met with others in the drug

underworld, including an individual named Preen, with the hope of expanding hisHe was prepared to assume the risks of

meeting others in the business, and discussing business opportunities with them,because he hoped for lucrative rewards.

[13]

The business as operated by Mr. Strong was quite sophisticated.

Strong sold, on his own evidence, high quality marihuana.
buyers.

Mr.

He had regular

He had product delivered to the underground parking lot of the building

in which he lived.

Sometimes he sold samples.

he stored product and where it was packaged.

He had a “stash house” whereHe had regular clients who made

regular purchases.

[14]

Mr. Strong was well aware that what he was doing was illegal and that

there were risks of being caught by police.

He took steps to evade being

detected by the authorities. These included trying to cover his steps by carryinghis product in a hockey bag and carrying a hockey stick with him whentransporting it, using encrypted means to communicate with others in hisbusiness and using coded language when discussing his business in textmessages or on the telephone. I find Mr. Strong was a savvy entrepreneur.

[15]

In summary, I accept that Mr. Strong was a sophisticated business man

involved in a large scale commercial wholesale marihuana business.

His

business was carried on over years and made Mr. Strong sufficient profit that hedid not feel he needed any other job.

[16]

I will address now the specific counts before me.

business into the Toronto market.

September 11, 2014 trafficking marihuana count

[17]

On September 11, 2014, Mr. Strong sold marihuana to his friend James

[18]

Mr. Strong agreed that on September 11, 2014, he had sent a message

to either Craig Jones or Nathan Freeman and that one of them had dropped off abox of marihuana at his address at 628 Fleet Street.

Mr. Evans-O’Connell met

Mr. Strong at 628 Fleet Street that morning at 11:41.

Mr. Evans-O’Connell left

with a big box.

Mr. Evans-O’Connell then went to his storage locker. When the

police entered the locker later that day, they found fifteen bags of marihuanainside. This marihuana weighed 28.4 pounds.
September 25, 2014 trafficking marihuana count

[19]

It was agreed that Mr. Strong also sold marihuana to Mr. Evans-

O’Connell on September 25, 2014.

Based on the police evidence about the

marihuana found in the locker belonging to Mr. Evans-O’Connell, I accept thatthis transaction was a sale of 28.4 pounds.
October 28 and November 24, 2014 conspiracy to traffic in marihuana

[20]

Mr. Strong testified that Craig Jones was one of his marihuana suppliers.

Mr. Jones provided him with marihuana on demand.
him with

marihuana in boxes and would deliver

Mr. Jones would providethe marihuana to the

underground parking lot at 628 Fleet Street so that Mr. Strong could sell themarihuana to his clients.
others.

These clients included Mr. Evans-O’Connell and

Evans-O’Connell.

November 24, 2014 possession of proceeds of crime - $53,832
Police conducted a search warrant at Mr. Strong’s residence on

November 24, 2014.

They located $53,832 in cash in a safe in his residence.

Mr. Strong testified that this cash was from his marihuana sales over time.
November 24, 2014 possession of marihuana for the purpose oftrafficking

[22]

This count relates to the marihuana found in the apartment at 126

Simcoe Street, the location used by Mr. Strong as his “stash house”. When thepolice executed a search warrant at this address, they located about 40 poundsof marihuana.

The marihuana was located in bags that were then placed in

boxes and hockey bags.

[23]

The issue for the jury to determine at trial was whether Mr. Strong was in

possession of this marihuana or whether, as he claimed, it was really possessedby Nathan Freeman, whose apartment this appears to have been.

[24]

The jury heard about and saw surveillance video of Mr. Strong taking

marihuana in and out of the apartment at 126 Simcoe Street.

They clearly

rejected his evidence about who had control of this marihuana and concludedthat Mr. Strong had it in his possession.

I find that this was a location used

regularly by Mr. Strong to store large quantities of marihuana away from hishome.

He did this in order to avoid any detection by authorities of his illegal

business by keeping it away from his home.
b) Circumstances of the Offender

[25]

During the trial, I heard evidence from Mr. Strong about his background.

Further information is contained in a Pre-Sentence Report (“PSR”).

[21]

[26]

Mr. Strong is now thirty-two years old.

He has one prior criminal

conviction for theft under from March 2004. He received a suspended sentence

[27]

Mr. Strong began selling marihuana while in his fourth year of studies at

Brock University.

At that point, he sold small amounts. In 2009, following some

family deaths, he began smoking more marihuana himself.

He graduated from

university in the summer of 2009 and then enrolled in the Canadian SecuritiesCourse. By January 2010, he had failed the course twice and did not have a job.
His mother supported him and he continued to sell marihuana at the retail level.

[28]

By the end of 2011, Mr. Strong was buying marihuana a pound at a time

and breaking it up and selling it.
$1,000 and $3,000.

He testified that a pound cost him between

He testified that in 2012, he was “jumped by two guys”.

They punched him in the face and tried to rob him.

Following surgery, he

decided that it was safer to conduct his marihuana sales as a wholesale dealer,rather than selling at the street level. He did so over 2012 and 2013. Around thistime, he met James Evans-O’Connell, who began buying five pounds ofmarihuana from him at a time.

[29]

By the end of 2013, James Evans-O’Connell was buying ten pounds of

marihuana from Mr. Strong at a time.

Mr. Strong testified that Mr. Evans-

O’Connell was more than half his business.

By 2014, Mr. Strong was selling

marihuana in quantities of ten to twenty pounds.

There is evidence before me

that sales in the fall of 2014 were of even larger volumes.

[30]

While Mr. Strong used marihuana regularly from the time he was in

university until his arrest, he advised the author of the Pre-Sentence Report thathe has stopped using marihuana since his arrest.

and probation.

Following his arrest in 2014, Mr. Strong was not able to secure full time

employment until February 2016.

He is now working as a transition specialist

advising clients about investments.
Counsel.

His employer is Investment Planning

His annual income is approximately $45,000.

Mr. Strong was able to

complete the Canadian Securities course in September 2016, while awaiting trialin this matter.

[32]

The defence has filed letters from others at Investment Planning Counsel

where Mr. Strong currently works.
investigation.

His employer is aware of the criminal

The letter from the President and CEO indicates that the firm

would be prepared to maintain Mr. Strong’s employment following a conviction ifhe receives a suspended sentence.

The letter indicates that if there were any

large gap of time for which Mr. Strong is unavailable, it would be difficult to holdhis position.

[33]

A second letter from an Associate at Investment Planning Counsel

indicates that Mr. Strong is remorseful and has learned from what happened. Heindicates that he will offer Mr. Strong a position of employment regardless of thelegal outcome in this case.

[34]

Mr. Strong reported to the author of the PSR that he has critically

evaluated his life and has put the drug sales business behind him.

He and his

mother joined the Harvest Bible Chapel evangelical congregation two years ago.
He assists with weekly services and attends small group church meetings.

His

pastor’s letter indicates that the pastor believes that Mr. Strong has deepened hisfaith and is a changed man.

[35]
church.

I have been provided with other supportive letters from members of theThey suggest that Mr. Strong has become more open and humble, that

[31]

he is remorseful for his conduct and that he has shown genuine care andconcern for others.
As he spoke in court at the conclusion of the sentencing hearing, Mr.

Strong eloquently conveyed the depth of his regret and remorse for the lifestylethat he chose, and which led to these convictions. He said that at the time, heconvinced himself that what he was doing was justified, without thinking aboutthe impact that it had on others.

He expressed shame about the way he

appeared in the intercepted communications.

[37]

Mr. Strong tells me that he has reflected deeply on the poor decisions

that he has made and that he is committed to making lasting, life-long changes.
He says he is fortunate to have a wide circle of support and that he is confidentthat he has turned his life around and will become a positive member of society.
C.

[38]

Positions of the PartiesThe Crown seeks a sentence of five to six years for the drug offences

and a sentence of 18 months, consecutive, for the proceeds charge. In addition,the Crown seeks the following ancillary orders: a fine for $167,660, a DNA orderunder s. 487.051(3) and a ten year weapon prohibition under s. 109(2)(a).

[39]

The Crown also sought forfeiture orders of both the $53,832 seized from

Mr. Strong’s address and of the $6,860 seized at 126 Simcoe Street.

At the

conclusion of the sentencing hearing, Mr. Ghebrai indicated that he consented tothe forfeiture order of the $53,832 seized from Mr. Strong’s apartment.
Consistent with Mr. Strong’s position at trial that he had no knowledge of themoney seized from 126 Simcoe Street, Mr. Ghebrai took no position on theforfeiture of this money. On April 25, 2017, I made both of the forfeiture orderssought by the Crown.

[36]

[40]

The defence position is that a fit sentence is in the range of 15 to 18

months in totality.

The defence says that I should deduct from this credit for

deduct between 3 ½ and 4 months for harsh conditions of bail. Were I to findthat a fit sentence was 15 months, with the 8 months then deducted, that wouldleave 7 months.

The defence asks that I impose a 90-day intermittent sentence

for the drug offences and that I impose whatever additional time I see as fit, up totwo years less a day conditional, for the proceeds offence. Ultimately, thedefence asks me to be as creative as I can in imposing a sentence that willenable Mr. Strong to serve a brief further period of jail on an intermittent basis,and the rest as a conditional sentence, thereby enabling him to continue hisrehabilitation and employment.
D.

Analysisa)

[41]
purpose

General principles

The CDSA offences of trafficking in marihuana and possession for theof

trafficking in marihuana carry

a maximum sentence of

life

imprisonment.

The conspiracy to traffic in marihuana also carries a maximum

life sentence.

The possession of proceeds of crime over $5,000 carries a

maximum sentence of ten years.

[42]

As Trotter J., as he then was, noted at para. 30 of his decision in R. v.

Tran, 2016 ONSC 3225, when offenders are sentenced for their involvement inlarge scale drug trafficking, general deterrence and denunciation are the mostimportant factors to consider.

[43]

I have been provided with a casebook by the Crown and an extensive

sentencing chart by the defence.

These make clear that there is a fairly broad

range of sentences that have been imposed for trafficking in marihuana.

between 3 ½ and 4 months for state misconduct. The defence says I should also

[44]

One helpful case is that of R. v. Shin, 2012 ONSC 6293, 272 C.R.R. (2d)

120; aff’d 2015 ONCA 189, 322 C.C.C. (3d) 554. The accused was sentenced to

consecutive, for possession of proceeds of crime.

The evidence was that the

offender was in possession of 12 kg of marihuana (20 pounds) and $240,000 ofproceeds of drug sales.

The Court of Appeal affirmed the sentence, concluding

at paras. 98-100 that it was within the range, that the offender was a career drugtrafficker and that he operated a well-planned business over 14 years.

[45]

It is the defence position that this sentence, though affirmed by the Court

of Appeal, is a “complete outlier”.

[46]

The Court of Appeal in Shin referred to the decision in R. v. Tran, [2005]

O.J. No. 5920 (S.C.); aff’d [2006] O.J. No, 4161 (C.A.). In that case, the offenderpleaded guilty to possession for the purpose of trafficking marihuana.

He had

been involved in shipping by rail large amounts of marihuana from BritishColumbia to Ontario.

Police had searched his storage area and seized 750

pounds of marihuana, with an estimated value of $2.1 million.

The Court

accepted that there was a high level of planning and organization in the schemeand that the offender was a trusted member of the organization.

Given his

significant role and the very large scale nature of the operation, the Court ofAppeal upheld the four year sentence.

[47]

In R. v. Tran et al, 2016 ONSC 3225, [2016] O.J. No. 2468, Trotter J.

found that three years was a fit sentence for Steven Tran. Mr. Tran was a firstoffender found guilty of conspiracy to traffic marihuana, trafficking marihuana andpossession of the proceeds of crime.

He was one of a group involved in a

sophisticated operation involving the weekly shipping of hundreds of pounds ofmarihuana from British Columbia to Ontario. Mr. Tran was seen carrying bags or

five years for possession for the purpose of trafficking and to eighteen months,

suitcases in and out of a co-accused’s condominium.

On arrest, he had

$200,000 in cash.
There are numerous other cases that have been put before me

suggesting a range in the reformatory time.

For example, in R. v. Caven and

Scott, (1999), 139 C.C.C. (3d) 449 (Ont. C.A.), the Court of Appeal upheld a 15
month sentence for offenders convicted, after trial, of trafficking in hashish. Thetrial judge found that they had trafficked in about four kilograms of hashish. Thiscase suggests to me that upper reformatory sentences are appropriate in casesthat are much less aggravated than that of Mr. Strong.
b)
The defence position that the case law and the “war oncannabis” are a “relic”

[49]

Defence counsel forcefully advocates that the existing caselaw, and the

ranges discussed therein, are a “relic”.

This submission, as I understand it, is

grounded in the fact that the Government of Canada has introduced legislation tolegalize marihuana. I am advised that this legislation has received first reading inParliament.

While that legislation was not put before me, the argument was

made that the legislation signals a recognition by Parliament that marihuana is ofsuch low harm that Canadians will, when the legislation becomes law, bepermitted to use marihuana recreationally. When considering where in the rangeto impose sentence, the defence says that I should be mindful of the sea changethat is coming to this country and that the sentence imposed should bedramatically less than that proposed by the Crown.

[50]

While the argument is not identical to that made before Trotter J. in Tran,

it is similar.

There, counsel asked the sentencing judge to adjourn the

sentencing hearing to await anticipated changes in the legal status of marihuana.
The argument was made in that case that because possession of marihuana

[48]

would soon be legal, there was no need for a sentence to give effect to generaldeterrence.
Trotter J. unequivocally rejected this argument, commenting that judges

should not refuse to apply laws based on their subjective impressions of thelikelihood of reform. He held that judges are not entitled to subjectively apply thelaw and individuals are not entitled to pick and choose which laws to obey, evenif changes and reform are on the horizon.

[52]

Mr. Ghebrai says that things have moved forward since Trotter J.’s May

2016 decision so that there is now more than a speculative impression of thelikelihood of reform. Legislation has been tabled and received first reading.

[53]

In my view, while the landscape may have changed somewhat since

Trotter J.’s decision, the logic animating his decision remains valid.

There is no

certainty that the legislation that has been introduced will become law. There aremany stages that it needs to go through, stages at which it could be significantlyamended.

In my opinion, Trotter J.’s comment that “if judges refuse to apply

laws based on their subjective impressions of the likelihood of reform, the rule oflaw

would

be

seriously

undermined”

remains

valid,

notwithstanding

the

introduction into Parliament, by way of first reading, of new legislation.

[54]

I do not think it is my role to pick and choose which laws to apply. My

responsibility is to apply the law as it exists in this country, and to give effect tothe principles of sentencing as they exist now. I do not think it is an appropriateexercise of my sentencing discretion to impose a sentence that is well below thatwhich would be otherwise appropriate on the basis of the counsel’s submissionthat new legislation will fundamentally change the legal landscape.

[51]

[55]

It is my intention to impose a fit sentence for the offence and offender in

view of the law as it currently exists, and as it existed when Mr. Strong committedI decline to speculate about what the law may, at some point in

the future, become.

Surely, in any event, it will not become the law in this

country that private citizens like Mr. Strong will be acting legally when they storeand sell pounds and pounds of marihuana at a time as private wholesale dealers.
c)

[56]

Should the proceeds sentence be concurrent or consecutive?

The Crown’s position is that there should be one sentence imposed for all

of the drug offences and a consecutive sentence imposed for the proceedsoffence.

[57]

It is the defence position that the proceeds sentence should run

concurrent to the drug sentence, although I did understand that the defenceposition to be that it would be open to me to impose a conditional sentence forthe proceeds count and to order that it be consecutive.

[58]

No authorities dealing specifically with the issue of when a proceeds

count should attract a sentence that is consecutive or concurrent were put beforeme.

[59]

In R. v. Pham, 2008 ONCA 421, [2008] O.J. No. 2080, the Court of

Appeal upheld Justice Molloy’s decision to impose a total sentence of six yearsfor convictions for possession for the purpose of trafficking, conspiracy to traffic,trafficking and possession of proceeds of crime.

It appears that the four years

was for the possession for the purpose count and that six years was for theconspiracy.

I can only conclude that the proceeds sentence, whatever it may

have been, ran concurrently.

these offences.

[60]

In the Shin decision, McIsaac J. imposed a sentence of five years for the

possession for the purpose of trafficking count, and 18 months consecutive forthe trial judge’s decision that the sentence be consecutive.

The Crown invites

me to follow this.

[61]

I note, however, that the proceeds of crime conviction in the Shin case

flowed from the accused’s decision to allow one of his criminal associates to usehis stash house as a place to store money made from selling cocaine. This wasquite separate and apart from his possession of marihuana for the purpose oftrafficking.

In my view, the proceeds count was very much a separate

transaction from the trafficking, justifying a consecutive sentence.

[62]

In the case of Mr. Strong, his possession of proceeds, in the form of cash

located at his apartment, was the profits from his marihuana sales. I see this asvery much related to the other offences. While I think it is open to me to imposea consecutive sentence for the proceeds offence, in these circumstances, ratherthan impose a consecutive sentence, I am going to impose one global sentencefor all of the counts before me. All of the counts relate to Mr. Strong’s marihuanasales and trafficking and the possession of his profits from that activity.
d)

[63]

Credit for alleged state misconduct

The defence position is that the sentence imposed should be reduced on

account of alleged state misconduct.

[64]

In R. v. Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 206, the Supreme

Court of Canada considered the possibility of reducing an offender’s sentence totake account of a violation of his or her constitutional rights. Writing for the court,Lebel J. explained at para. 49 that because s. 718 of the Criminal Code providesthat the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to contribute to respect for the law

the possession of the proceeds of crime count. The Court of Appeal did not vary

and maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society, it must be understood aspermitting a sentencing judge to consider not only the acts of an offender, butHe held, at para. 47, that if the facts alleged to

constitute a Charter breach are related to one or more of the relevant principlesof

sentencing,

then

the

sentencing

consideration in arriving at a fit sentence.

judge

may

properly

take

this

into

Further, it is clear from para. 53 that a

sentence may be reduced even when the state misconduct does not rise to thelevel of a Charter breach.

Thus, state violence or police misconduct may be

taken into account when crafting a fit and proportionate sentence.

See also: R.

v. Donnelly, 2016 ONCA 988, 345 C.C.C. (3d) 56.

[65]

In support of his argument that there was state misconduct, Mr. Ghebrai

has filed a transcript of Officer Kilfeather’s evidence at the preliminary inquiry.
The defence position, as I understand it, is that this transcript makes clear thatthe officer violated Mr. Strong’s right to counsel.

More specifically, it is alleged

that having provided him with his right to counsel, and knowing that he wished toexercise that right, the officer did not hold off questioning Mr. Strong. Instead, hecontinued to ask Mr. Strong questions, including showing him photographs ofpeople and asking him if he knew the individuals, asking him about how much hepaid in rent and asking him about the combination for the locker that was locatedby the police during the search of the apartment.

[66]

Mr. Ghebrai submits that he has no obligation to prove a Charter violation

as Nasogaluak permits me to reduce the sentence I impose on Mr. Strong forsomething short of a Charter breach.

[67]

There was much discussion at the sentencing hearing as to whether the

record before me was sufficient for this argument to be made and whether OfficerKilfeather or other officers should be called.

At one point, the Crown asserted

that it was not open to me to determine the issue of whether there was state

also acts of state actors.

misconduct on the basis of the transcript of the preliminary inquiry.

Ultimately,

when I was prepared to adjourn the sentencing so that evidence could be called

evidence before me fell short of establishing any state misconduct.

[68]

I observe that there was a defence pre-trial Charter application filed in

this case.

In it, the defence alleged various violations, including that the police

elicited evidence from Mr. Strong before affording him the opportunity to exercisehis right to counsel.

This application was abandoned. As a result, no evidence

was called on a Charter motion, no argument was made and, perhaps mostimportantly, no finding of any Charter breach was ever made.

[69]

However, I accept the defence position that the absence of any finding of

a Charter breach does not bar me from considering whether there has been statemisconduct that should result in a reduction of sentence.

[70]

I have carefully reviewed the transcript of Officer Kilfeather’s evidence.

The officer testified that while he explained the right to counsel to Mr. Strong, andwas told by Mr. Strong that he wished to call contact counsel, there was no abilityto facilitate this in Mr. Strong’s apartment was it was “an insecure premise” andprivacy could not be afforded. He explained this to Mr. Strong. The officer saidthat he told Mr. Strong that he had no obligation to speak with him, but that if Mr.Strong chose to, he would write down what was said.

[71]

The officer said that Mr. Strong wanted to know what the investigation

was all about and was asking the officer questions. The officer did not agree thathe was asking questions to elicit evidence and said “I wasn’t necessarily lookingto afford evidence”.

The officer summarized a bit of the investigation and then

agreed that he showed photographs to Mr. Strong and asked if he knew any of

on this issue, the Crown declined to call any evidence and submitted that the

the individuals depicted, whom he explained to Mr. Strong were targets of theinvestigation.
The officer told Mr. Strong that the police were going to take the safe and

that if he wanted, he could give them the combination and they would then takethe items contained in it and would leave the safe without it being damaged.

[73]

The officer also agreed that he asked Mr. Strong what he paid in rent.

He said that “part of this was just a discussion” and that “has to do with two guyspassing time while we’re awaiting for the transportation vehicle”. The officer saidthat he was not trying to get Mr. Strong to tell him something that would implicatehim.

He agreed that some of their conversation was geared towards eliciting

inculpatory information.

[74]

The jurisprudence under s. 10(b) of the Charter establishes that if a

detained person, after being advised of his right to counsel, chooses to exerc isethat right, the police must provide him with a reasonable opportunity to exercisethat right.

Police must refrain from eliciting incriminating evidence from a

detained person until after he has had the opportunity to consult with counsel:
R. v. Suberu, 2009 SCC 33, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 460, at para. 38; R. v. Grant 2009
SCC 32, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 353 at para. 58; R. v. Taylor, 2014 SCC 50, [2014] 2
S.C.R. 495, at paras. 20-26.

[75]

The evidence before me suggests that after providing him with his rights

to counsel, and knowing that he wished to exercise that right, Officer Kilfeatherdid not hold off seeking to elicit incriminating evidence from Mr. Strong. On thebasis of the evidence before me, it appears to me that the officer did not hold offquestioning of Mr. Strong as he ought to have.

[72]

[76]

The Crown submits that if there is any police error, it did not rise to the

level of state misconduct warranting a reduction in sentence.

The defence

[77]

In my view, Mr. Strong’s sentence should not be reduced on account of

state misconduct.

While the officer should have held off asking Mr. Strong any

questions intended to elicit incriminating evidence before Mr. Strong had theopportunity to consult with counsel, the nature of the discussion, viewed in thecontext in which it occurred as described by Officer Kilfeather, is not so seriousas to warrant a reduction in Mr. Strong’s sentence.

Nothing really came of the

questioning, other than that the police opened the safe without breaking it.
questioning had no impact on Mr. Strong.

The

There is no suggestion that he

provided any evidence that was later used to incriminate him. I am not preparedto conclude that any mis-step by an officer, regardless of whether it has anyimpact on the trial or the accused, necessarily warrants a reduction in sentence.
e)

[78]

Credit for onerous bail conditions

Mr. Ghebrai also seeks a reduction in sentence for the time that Mr.

Strong spent on house arrest and under restrictive bail conditions.

[79]

As Rosenberg J.A. held in R. v. Downes (2005) 205 C.C.C. (3d) 488

(Ont.C.A.), house arrest is a form of punishment. Accordingly, time spent understringent bail conditions, especially house arrest, must be taken into account as arelevant mitigating circumstance. There is no rigid formula for how much credit isto be given.

[80]

Mr. Strong was arrested on November 24, 2014.

He was released on

bail on November 28, 2014. As a result of this recognizance, he was to remain inhis residence at all times except for emergencies or if in the company of one ofhis sureties or Jesse Reynolds.

While I accept that this was a significant

argues that this warrants a 3 ½ to 4 month reduction in sentence.

deprivation of his liberty, I note that he was free to leave his home at any time, forany purpose, as long as he was with one of his sureties.
In March of 2015, Mr. Strong requested a variation to his bail to permit

him to obtain employment.

The Crown agreed in principle and the plan was for

Mr. Strong to begin work on March 24, 2015.

Unfortunately, the Justice of the

Peace before whom the variation was brought declined to grant it initially.
resulted in delay.

This

Ultimately, although the bail was varied on May 8, 2015 to

permit Mr. Strong to work. Mr. Ghebrai says that by that point, the job Mr. Stronghad been offered was no longer available.

The result was that Mr. Strong

remained under house arrest, with the existing exceptions that he could leavewith one of his sureties or with Jesse Reynolds.

[82]

The bail was varied again on September 2, 2015 to permit Mr. Strong to

travel to work at Investment Planning Counsel.

This recognizance remained in

place until February 26, 2016.

[83]

On February 26, 2016, the bail was varied so that the house arrest was

lifted and a curfew was imposed on Mr. Strong from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
There remained an exception that he could leave at any time if accompanied byone of his sureties.

[84]

It is Mr. Strong’s position that he should be credited for the house arrest

from November 28, 2014 to September 2, 2015.

He suggests credit of 2½ to 4

months for this period.

[85]

The defence also asks that Mr. Strong be credited for the restrictive

conditions that remained in place when he was able to work in the periodfollowing September 2, 2015.

[81]

[86]

In total, I understand the defence to seek credit of 3 ½ to 4 months for the

harsh bail conditions.

been minimal, as evidenced by what he has been able to accomplish while onbail.

He has obtained full time employment, was able to complete the Canadian

Securities Course, and has become a valued and integral member of his church,offering assistance to others in the church regularly.

[88]

In this case, Mr. Strong spent just over nine months on house arrest.

While it was not the most restrictive house arrest, in that he could leave homewith one of his sureties or Jesse Reynolds, I find that this bail placed prettysignificant restrictions on him. I am going to credit him with 70 days, or just overtwo months for this nine-month period.

[89]

I decline to provide any additional credit for the time after he was able to

work after September 2, 2015. In my view, the evidence that he has providedmakes clear that the restrictions on Mr. Strong’s liberty had a minimal effect onhim. He was able to work. He was able to join a church, to attend meetings andservices, to begin and maintain a new relationship and to create and continuerelationships with members of his community.

In many, though not all respects,

his life appears to have returned to normal.
f)

[90]

The Sentence to be ImposedAs I have set out, Mr. Strong has been found guilty of involvement in a

scheme to sell marihuana.

He was a self-described wholesale marihuana dealer

who obtained large volumes of marihuana from his friends Nathan Freeman andCraig Jones and sold it to others, including James Evans-O’Connell, over aperiod of several months.

The Crown’s position is that the restrictions on Mr. Strong’s liberty have

[87]

[91]

I find that the following factors are aggravating:
Mr. Strong had a leadership role in his marihuana sales enterprise.

He

Mr. Strong sold marihuana multiple times over the fall of 2014.

The

evidence supports a conclusion that he had been involved in themarihuana sales business for multiple years, including for periods outsidethe time frame in the indictment: R. v. Larche, 2006 SCC 56, [2006] 2
S.C.R. 762;

There was a large quantity of marihuana sold or possessed by Mr.Strong.

I accept the Crown’s position that he sold at least 124 pounds

over the fall of 2014 and had a further 40 pounds in his possession at 126
126 Simcoe St.;

The value of the marihuana was significant;

Mr. Strong’s well developed network included drivers who provided himwith marihuana and regular customers who made purchases from him.

[92]

At the same time, Mr. Strong took responsibility for a number of the

offences charged.

He pleaded guilty to most of them.

Counsel tells me that it

was always his intent to plead guilty to the marihuana charges. I find this difficultto accept, given that no one seemed aware that he planned to plead guilty to anyof the charges until the day the trial was scheduled to begin. I accept, however,that the guilty pleas do demonstrate an acceptance of responsibility and are ademonstration of remorse.

[93]

I find that the following further factors are mitigating:

operated at a high level in a sophisticated commercial enterprise;

Mr. Strong has only one prior conviction for an unrelated offence from

Mr. Strong has acknowledged responsibility for the offences;

Since his arrest, Mr. Strong appears to have taken significant steps toturn his life around. He has given of his time to others and has done whathe can to become a productive contributing member of society, through hischurch, his community and through his employment.

[94]

I do not think the circumstances of the offence and offender warrant a

global sentence in the six and a half year range as sought by the Crown. I viewthe circumstances, viewed as a whole, as less serious than those discussed bythe Court of Appeal in both Shin and Tran. Certainly, I do not see Mr. Strong’srole in the marihuana business as being as extensive and as aggravated as theroles of the offenders in those cases.
aggravated.

Nor is the proceeds offence as

Bearing in mind all of the circumstances of the offence and

offender, and the relevant caselaw that has been put before me, I impose asentence of 3 years for the drug offences. I impose a concurrent sentence of 1
year for the proceeds offence.

The total sentence, therefore, will be one of 3

years or 1095 days.

[95]
release.
days.

I deduct from this the five days of custody Mr. Strong served before hisHe should be credited for this at 1.5:1, reducing his sentence by eightIn addition, as I have indicated, I give Mr. Strong 70 days for harsh bail

conditions.

The result is that the sentence to be imposed is three years less 78

days. This is 1017 days or 2 years, 287 days.

2004;

g)

[96]

Should there be a fine and if so for how much?

The Crown seeks a fine of $167,660.

In a chart filed as Exhibit 3 on

made at least $167,660 in revenue from marihuana sales to Mr. Evans-O’Connellbetween September 11 and November 21, 2014.

This is said by the Crown to be

a low estimate as it does not take into account sales to individuals other than Mr.Evans-O’Connell.

The Crown reminds me that on Mr. Strong’s own evidence, he

was also selling to other people over this period.

[97]

While the Crown acknowledges that Mr. Strong’s profit was only a

fraction of the value of the marihuana he sold, the submission is made that I c aninfer from the photographs in Exhibit 4, photographs seized from Mr. Strong’sphone and said to be photographs of large amounts of cash taken at his home,that he was in possession of large amounts of cash.

[98]

The defence position is that the evidence before me does not support the

imposition of a fine in the magnitude sought by the Crown. Mr. Ghebrai remindsme that the cash at Mr. Strong’s apartment was seized and that it was hisevidence that this was the profit he accumulated over time. Mr. Ghebrai submitsthat any fine should be in the $10,000 to $20,000 range, given that there hasalready been forfeiture of the $53,000.

[99]

Section 734(2) permits a court to fine an offender if satisfied that the

offender is able to pay the fine. In order to impose a fine, therefore, I must besatisfied on a balance of probabilities that Mr. Strong has the ability to paywhatever fine I impose.

[100]

In R. v. Topp, 2011 SCC 43, [2011] 3 S.C.R 119 at para. 27,

Fish J. observed for the Court that “in the absence of a reasonable explanation tothe contrary, past receipt of illegally obtained funds will often – but not always –

sentencing, the Crown sets out why, in its view, I should conclude that Mr. Strong

support an inference that the offender still possesses sufficient funds to pay afine at the time of sentencing.” Sentencing courts retain a discretion to determine

[101]

I am not satisfied that Mr. Strong has the ability to pay a fine close to the

amount sought by the Crown.

The Crown has not accounted, at all, for the fact

that out of the money made from the sales, Mr. Strong had to pay for themarihuana he sold. The Crown has no evidence as to what profit Mr. Strong wasearning on his sales.

The fact that the Crown has proven that Mr. Strong sold

marihuana worth well over $167,660 does not, in itself, justify a fine of thatmagnitude.

[102]

The evidence that Mr. Strong provided was that he sold 20 to 60 pounds

of marihuana to Mr. Evans-O’Connell a month.
accounted for about half of his sales.

Mr. Evans-O’Connell only

This means that in the fall of 2014, Mr.

Strong was selling between 40 and 120 pounds of marihuana a month.

[103]

Mr. Strong testified that he was making about $50 to $100 per pound of

marihuana he sold.

In my view, based on the evidence as a whole, Mr. Strong

was likely undervaluing the profit he was making.

[104]

But, even on Mr. Strong’s own figures, he would have been making

between $2,000 and $12,000 profit per month. I reject his evidence that the onlyprofit he had from his entire marihuana business was the $53,832 found in thesafe in his apartment.

This seems far less profit than he would, on his own

evidence, have been making.

[105]

I am left without evidence as to precisely what profits Mr. Strong was

making. I have significant concerns about relying on the photographs of the cashtendered by the Crown in Exhibit 4 as evidence that Mr. Strong has the ability to

how much weight should be given to proof of past possession of funds.

pay the sort of fine sought by the Crown. There is no evidence as to when thesephotographs were taken.

Even if they were taken in Mr. Strong’s apartment, as

created on August 17, 2013 affords evidence that Mr. Strong has this cash now.

[106]

Mr. Strong is clearly capable of making money by advising clients about

investments.

He has managed to secure a position earning $45,000 a year. He

has $10,000 in savings.

The money that Mr. Strong says was his accumulated

profits from the marihuana business includes the $53,832 that has been seizedfrom him and ordered forfeited.
excess of that amount.

But I find that his profits were in fact well in

Given the evidence, I am satisfied that Mr. Strong has

the ability to pay a fine of $25,000 and order that he do so.

[107]

Pursuant to s. 737(2)(a), I am required to impose a surcharge of 30 per

cent of any fine. A victim surcharge of $7,500 is imposed.
h)

[108]

Other Ancillary Orders

As I have indicated, I have already made forfeiture orders for the $53,832

seized from Mr. Strong’s apartment and the $6,860 found at 126 Simcoe Street.

[109]

The defence concedes that the s. 109 firearms order is mandatory and it

is made for ten years.

[110]

The defence says that the DNA order is not needed and asks that I

exercise my discretion not to make it.

I have considered s. 487.051(3) and, in

particular, the minimal criminal record that Mr. Strong has, the nature of theoffences, the circumstances of the offender and the impact that the making ofsuch an order would have on Mr. Strong’s privacy and security of the person. Inview of the connection between drug trafficking and other violent offences, I amsatisfied that it is in the best interests of the administration of justice for the order

the Crown says, it seems to me to be a real leap to say that a photograph

to be made.

This is so particularly because of Mr. Strong’s diminished

expectation of privacy following conviction, the minimal intrusion into Mr. Strong’s

Woollcombe J.
Released: May 24, 2017

security of the person, and the important interests served by the DNA databank.

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
– and –
ERIK STRONG
REASONS FOR SENTENCE
Woollcombe J.
Released: May 24, 2017

CITATION: R. v. Strong, 2017 ONSC 3163
COURT FILE NO.: 107/16
DATE: 2017 05 24

