ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B E T W E E N:

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
Applicant )
- and )
CLARK ERIC SAUVE
Respondent )

Cynthia Jennison, for the Crown

James Marentette, for Clark EricSauve

HEARD: April 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10,11, 12, 2017

The Honourable Mr. Justice H.S. ArrellREASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION

[1]

Clark Eric Sauve is charged that on the 29 th day of December 2014 in

the City of Cambridge did commit second degree murder on the person of

CITATION: R. v. SAUVE, 2017 ONSC 2577
COURT FILE NO.: CJ8844
DATE: 30 May 2017

Linda Sauve contrary to Section 235(1) of the Criminal Code of Canada.
Linda Sauve was the wife of Clark Eric Sauve. Mr. Sauve pleaded not

guilty to this charge and elected to be tried by judge alone with the consentof the Crown.
THE FACTS

[3]

The police received a 911 call on the 29 th of December 2014 at 2:45

a.m. The caller, who was a male, requested the police and an ambulance.
He stated that he had been beaten and he thought his wife had been shot.
He thought people were still in the house. The caller gave the address of66 Rouse Avenue in Cambridge which was the home of Mr. and Mrs.Sauve. The caller indicated he was in a wheelchair; he had been beaten,and was lying on the floor. The caller was asked for a description of thepeople in the house. He responded that he could not give a descriptionother than they were both females and they both had Halloween typemasks on their heads. He confirmed he was upstairs as was his wife. Thecall ended with the caller shouting to the police who were entering thehouse.

[4]

Sergeant Grift was dispatched at 2:46 a.m. and met Constable Foster

at 66 Rouse Ave. The outside of the house was dark. The front door wasclosed but unlocked. Upon entering the house, it also was dark. Sergeant

[2]

Grift called out and a male voice answered from upstairs. Two other

Constable Foster cleared the first floor and the basement.

[5]

Sergeant Grift stated there was no sign of anyone else in the house.

There was no sign of forced entry at the front door.

[6]

Sergeant Grift then went upstairs and found the accused on the floor

of his bedroom, in his underwear, leaning on his elbow. His wheelchair wasat the foot of the bed. He heard the accused say his wife was in the nextroom. The doors to the other two rooms on the second floor were closed.
Sergeant Grift then checked the room that was described as an office. Thelight was on in that room when he opened the door. That room had a closetwith several gun lockers in it which were closed.

[7]

Sergeant Grift then went to the other bedroom and opened the door.

Again the light was on in this room. Linda Sauve was lying on the bed onher back. One arm was folded across her chest and one hanging down theside of the bed. She had on a black top and was naked from the waistdown. The covers were neatly folded back. There was blood covering herface and blood splatters on the wall above her head and on the floor. Therewas a shell casing on the floor. She had an injury to her right cheek andforehead consistent with gunshot wounds.

officers then arrived. Sergeant Grift sent them upstairs while he and

[8]

Sergeant Grift then went back to the accused’s bedroom and saw

had not been visible to him when he first attended the room as the bedcovered it. Sergeant Grift was then told by the EMS personnel, who hadarrived, that Mrs. Sauve was dead. Sergeant Grift said to the accused,
“You did this didn’t you.” According to Sergeant Grift’s evidence, theaccused looked at him and said nothing. Without prompting, the accusedthen said, that the keys for the gun cabinet were in the other room.

[9]

Sergeant Grift did a further search and found the back door closed

but unlocked. Officer Foster had earlier found it locked and unlocked it tolook in the back yard. The police found no sign of forced entry at any dooror any window. Officer Foster was directed to stay with the accused andthe gun and make sure the accused did not wash his hands.

[10] The evidence is clear that Mrs. Sauve was lying with several pillowsunder her head with her arms as previously described and the coversneatly folded back, exposing her entire body. All of the police and EMS
personnel testified that there was nothing to indicate any sort of struggle inher room, the accused’s room, or anywhere in the house. The photographstaken by forensics, of the accused’s room, the deceased and her room, andthe balance of the house confirm that evidence. There is no evidence that

that his bed had been pushed aside and a gun was observed on the floor. It

anything from the house was stolen. Mrs. Sauve’s purse was on the kitchen

taken.

[11] Sergeant Grift saw nothing in viewing the accused, to indicate he hadany injury whatsoever or had been beaten in any way. This evidence wasconfirmed by Officer Foster and the paramedics. The accused was arrestedlater that evening.

[12] Constable Foster heard the EMS tell the accused, his wife was dead.
He heard him reply, “Fuck off that’s not true this whole family would fallapart.” He also heard the accused tell the EMS that one of the femaleintruders came to the side of his bed and struck him in the head. He thentold Officer Foster that he heard two females screaming at his wife for thealarm code. The females then came into his room, turned on his light, andone of the females had a gun with which she hit him over the head. Hesays he then grabbed the gun with his right hand. The accused was thentransported to the hospital.

[13] Officer Foster stayed with the accused at the hospital and asked for adescription of the females to which he replied, that the one with the gunwas slender, not even five feet tall. Both were wearing jeans. Both of thefemales were beating on him.

counter and undisturbed. None of the numerous guns in the house were

[14] The evidence confirmed that the house was equipped with an

wheelchair at the foot of the bed in the accused’s bedroom and awheelchair at the bottom of the stairs, at the electronic lift.

[15] The accused told Mr. Bilyk, one of two paramedics who attended, thathe was struck by fists a number of times and later said that possibly he hadbeen hit by a gun. According to the accused, he simply woke up and theperson was in the room with him. He said he heard noise in the next room;then a scream, then a gunshot, and then silence. The only description hecould give of the intruders was that they were female. A thoroughexamination of the accused by the paramedics found no injury and allmedical testing of him was normal other than a slightly elevated heart rate.

[16] The accused told Mr. Heikoop, the other paramedic, that he wasassaulted by “two vicious bitches.” He told this witness he was pistolwhipped. He mentioned hearing yelling and screaming in the room nextdoor and someone asking for a code. It was then quiet and then theintruders came to him. Mr. Heikoop agreed the accused was upset anddistraught over the death of his wife and demanded several times that EMS
do more to try to resuscitate her.

[17] The police canvassed the neighbourhood and no one saw or heard

electronic lift from the main floor to the second floor. It also confirmed a

anything out of the ordinary. Several back yards were searched with the

found. The police who saw the deceased and her room confirmed theforensic pictures accurately portrayed what they had seen, other thaninitially her right arm was hanging down the side of the bed. It was placedon her chest by the EMS personal.

[18] On December 29 th Det. Huhtanen, a firearm expert who collected theevidence, met with the accused in hospital and swabbed for gunshotresidue from his hands, as well as collecting some clothing. On December30th he attended at the accused’s residence to log and collect variouspieces of evidence. He wore rubber gloves and a mask throughout. Helocated the semi-automatic Mauser handgun beside the accused’s bed onthe floor. The gun slide was open approximately two centimeters which hefound unusual, as that slide is usually either fully open or fully closed. Healso looked in the gun and saw the head of a bullet in the chamber.
Pictures of the gun were taken and were made exhibits. He confirmed that,to operate the gun, the slide must be flush with the handle of the gun.

[19] Det. Huhtanen noticed that there was grinding on the barrel of thegun in 3 locations fully removing any serial number or identification. Upontaking the magazine out of the gun, there was a cartridge in it as well. The

canine unit one and a quarter hours after the 911 call and nothing was

magazine was put in a separate evidence bag, as was the gun. The

[20] This witness also found a bullet in the pillow behind the deceased’shead and a bullet in the drywall imbedded in the insulation above her head.

[21] On January 3 rd, 2015, at the police station, photographs of the gunand bullets were taken. At all times, this officer testified he was wearinggloves and a mask. He stated that every time he touched a piece ofevidence he would put on new gloves, and then dispose of those gloves,and put on new gloves again before touching anything else. He was fullycognizant of the fact of cross contamination and took all precautions toavoid it.

[22] The two bullets recovered from the gun chamber and from themagazine, along with the gun, were sent to the Center of Forens icSciences in Toronto along with some clothing.

[23] Detective Huhtanen testified that there were numerous guns in thehome and several gun lockers in the garage with guns located there aswell. He also located what he considered a great deal of ammunition. Intotal, he found approximately 9 handguns, and several long guns. He foundtwo white pails of various types of ammunition. He also found two emptycartridges in the deceased’s bedroom that fit the Mauser pistol and which

magazine was fully inserted and locked in place when he found the gun.

had been fired. He sent those to the Center of Forensic Sciences.

note in his notebook each time he changed gloves. He did note however,that he used fresh gloves each time he touched an item. He indicated heactually remembers changing the gloves each time he touched an item. Heknew he was attempting to extract DNA and he was well aware of the realissue of cross contamination. He agreed his actions were not videorecorded. He was cross examined skillfully and in detail as to exactly howhe handled the gun and placed it in the evidence bags. His evidence wasslightly inconsistent with what he said at the preliminary hearing on May16th, 2016. I find little turns on that minor inconsistency.

[25] Detective Huhtanen recalled inserting his finger rather than aninstrument to remove the bullet from the gun. This was slightly differentfrom what he said at the preliminary inquiry. He agreed that if his hand,which was holding the gun, was the same hand that held the bullet, therecould be a transfer of DNA from the gun to the bullet unless he re -glovedbefore touching the bullet after holding the gun. He again emphasized thathe did indeed change gloves every time he touched something different.
He agrees that his right index finger would have touched the ejection portas he was attempting to take the cartridge out. He did not hold either the

[24] In cross examination Detective Huhtanen agreed he did not enter a

gun or the bullets while being photographed. That was done by his partner.

received some training from the accused with regards to his own alarmsystem “paradox”.

[27] Mr. Radu was well acquainted with the accused`s system. It wasoperated by either a code put into the alarm manually or by a four buttonfob. The accused had a motion detector, door detector, and sound sensorsin his home. He also had an alarm siren which supposedly would sound ifone of the sensors was breached. He also indicated that with this particularalarm system, some parts could be on while people were in the home andother parts off. For example, the door and sound sensors could be onwhile movement was off. This was called “the stay” mode.

[28] The accused had a sound sensor in the living room and one in thekitchen. The sound sensors would detect a window being broken, a platebeing broken, shaking keys nearby and for sure a gunshot. He testified thatthe sound sensor would clearly hear a gunshot in an upstairs bedroom. Heis not sure if it would hear yelling and screaming in a bedroom upstairs.
There were no sensors on the second level. The accused was veryknowledgeable about his alarm system and a well-qualified installer,according to Mr. Radu.

[26] Christian Radu purchased the accused’s alarm service business. He

[29] Mr. Radu extracted data from the alarm system. This information

alarm was activated by the fob. This meant that individuals could walkaround in the house without triggering the alarm. At 2:11(it was agreed bycounsel there was an 11 minute time differential to real time) on December29th, 2014, the living room and kitchen sensors went off. At 2:12 the alarmcode was entered into the system and the alarm was turned off. The actualcode must be punched into the alarm in person if it is activated. The fobcannot be used. Both the accused and his wife had such a code. Hetestified that the siren would have gone off when the alarm was triggered,but if it was not hooked up to the speaker, it would have made no noise. Hedid not test the siren.

[30] On cross-examination Mr. Radu indicated there is usually a delaywhen one enters through the door before the alarm goes off to allow thehome owner to get to the alarm panel and turn it off. He indicated theinstaller is the only one who can set the delay mode. He confirmed the logwould not show the door being opened if the code was put in within thedelay time. It would only show that the code was entered, and the systemdisarmed. There is no delay with regards to the sound sensors. They areinstantaneous.

showed that on December 28 th, 2014, at 10:00 a.m. “the stay” mode of the

[31] He recalls the accused being quite fussy about his alarm system. He

regularly.

[32] Mr. Philip Holgate is the president of the company ACI whichmonitored the accused’s alarm system and it was tested once per month.
Significantly, it was set that the police were not to be dispatched by ACI ifthere was a burglary. Instead ACI was simply to notify the home owner.
There were 13 different burglary zones in the home being various doorsand windows and 11 fire zones. There were motion detectors on the firstand second floor as well as the basement, and sound sensors in the livingroom and the kitchen. He testified that the sound system would clearly heara gunshot. He thought as well that the sensors would hear any screamingor yelling from the second floor.

[33] The alarm was last tested December 24 th, 2014 prior to the murder.
Mr. Holgate testified that according to the log the alarm went off onDecember 29 th at 2:23:52 in the living room sensor zone, in real time. Onesecond later, the kitchen alarm went off. At 2:24:52, the alarm wascancelled with the proper code being put in. On this occasion, the operatorcalled the home at 2:26:34 and spoke with someone who gave the wrongpasscode. The operator did nothing further since the alarm had previously

states that the system log shows that the alarm was armed and disarmed

been properly shut off.

before being answered by a male voice who indicated everything was okay.
The male voice was asked for the pass code and replied “big mac.” Theoperator indicated that was not correct, and the call was terminated. Thecorrect passcode was “peaches.” Mr. Holgate confirmed that the alarm wascancelled prior to the operator making the call. He also indicated that thesiren did go off for 32 seconds but again he had no information as towhether it was hooked up to the speakers.

[35] In cross examination Mr. Holgate confirmed that the alarm wascancelled 32 seconds after the first sound sensor triggered the alarm. Healso confirmed, contrary to Mr. Radu, that the alarm could be cancelled bythe fob anywhere in the house remotely, but only if the system was soprogrammed. He had no idea if the system was so programmed. Heagreed that Mr. Radu was more knowledgeable on that issue than he.

[36] Jennifer Plath of the Center of Forensic Sciences was a firearmsexpert who was so qualified, on consent. She received the Mauserhandgun with the serial numbers ground off. She stated the magazinewould not lock into place and it had to be held firmly in place, two handshad to be used for the gun to fire. She was able to test fire the gun once

[34] The actual telephone recording was played. The phone rang twice

she held the magazine fully inserted with two hands.

Police. One having been found on the floor and one having been found inthe pillow, in the deceased’s room. She also received two bullets. One fromthe wall and one from the pillow. She concluded both casings were fired bythe Mauser, as was the bullet found in the pillow. The bullet found in thewall was too damaged to determine if it was fired by the Mauser.

[38] Two casings found in the ammunition pale in the accused’s garage,were not found to have been fired from the Mauser although they couldhave been.

[39] Dr. Robert Gerrard, a forensic chemist at the Center of ForensicSciences, was qualified as an expert, on consent, to give an opinionregarding gunshot residue. It was Dr. Gerrard’s opinion that if one is notshooting a gun, then it is very unlikely that any gunshot residue would befound on a person’s hands or clothing. He confirmed that all four samplestaken from the accused’s hands had gunshot residue.

[40] Dr. Gerrard examined grindings found by police in the accused’sgarage under the grinder. He compared those grindings to the gun andstated the grindings were virtually indistinguishable from the gun, however,he also added the caveat that the material was a very common alloy and

[37] She examined two fired cartridge cases sent to her by the Kitchener

found in many things such as nails, bolts, nuts, screws, etc.

bottom which he found had gunshot residue. He also had a small plaidpyjama bottom with no gunshot residue and a long sleeve grey shirt with nogunshot residue.

[42] In cross examination he conceded that the gunshot residue particleshere could have occurred by way of transfer meaning that the accused’shands could have touched something with gunshot residue on it whichended up on his hands. He agreed that gunshot residue on one’s hand,could be transferred to clothes if the clothes were wiped with those hands.
The gunshot residue would remain on the clothes until they were likelylaundered. He agreed gunshot residue could be found on guns and emptycasings and if a person were touching those things, such as a gunsmith,there may be a transfer of gunshot residue. He also agreed that washing ofhands would remove most if not all such residue.

[43] Ms. Tanis Gornall gave evidence as an expert, on consent, withregards to DNA. She did not do the analysis, but, on consent, she wasgiving the evidence from the person who did, who was no longer availableto testify.

[44] Samples were available both from Mr. Sauve and Mrs. Sauve. The

[41] Dr. Gerrard had three samples of clothing being a large plaid pajama

witness agreed that DNA can be transferred by the handler. She is unable

[45] Ms. Gornall testified that the Mauser handgun had a mixture of 2
DNA samples from a swab of the handle, the magazine, and the releaseand slide. One of the samples matched the accused’s prof ile. The othersample was not suitable for testing.

[46] Two cartridges being from the gun and magazine were also testedand only the accused’s DNA was profiled on both. The two emptycartridges found on the floor of the deceased’s bedroom, were not suitablefor testing.

[47] The pyjamas with the small plaid, had blood on them and had amixture of at least two people’s DNA. The major DNA was the accused andthe minor DNA was his wife. There was no blood found on the large plaidpyjamas or on the gray long sleeve undershirt.

[48] The DNA on the gun’s Random Match Probability (RMP) was 1 in59,000 that the accused could not be excluded. The DNA samples in thecartridges that were in the gun RMP was 1 in 1.4 quadrillion that theaccused could not be eliminated.

[49] The deceased had worked for a local doctor for many years. One ofher best friends Hazal Keys worked with her. Ms. Keyes indicated that as

to tell when DNA is deposited, how it is deposited, or the order of deposit.

far as she knew, Mr. and Mrs. Sauve had a solid marriage. In 2011 she

recovering well. By December 20 th, 2014, he was in a wheelchair usingsupplemental oxygen and according to information received from Mrs.Sauve, quite depressed. Ms. Sauve indicated to Ms. Keys that she wasworried about her husband. She would often call him at home from theoffice. She went home daily for lunch and she told Ms. Keys that she wasafraid that her husband did not want to live the way he was living anylonger. She told Ms. Keys on one occasion, shortly before this murder, thatshe was worried that he might try to kill himself. Ms. Keyes testified thatshe was aware that there was some financial strain on the Sauve family asthe accused had to stop working in 2011 and the family was living on hissmall pension and income earned by Mrs. Sauve.

[50] Sherri Green, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Sauve, is a registerednurse and has been for the past 15 years. Her parents had been happilymarried for the past 40 years. She confirmed her father’s accident of hittinghis head on a beam in 2011 and being hospitalized. He steadily declined tothe point where he needed supplemental oxygen, a wheelchair, hadstopped driving and was having peripheral vision problems. He sold hiscompany to Mr. Radu. She was aware that her father, as was her

became aware that the accused had hit his head on a beam and was not

grandfather, was a gun collector. She knew there were lockers and guns

pride in his home and the security system. He was very cautious about thesecurity of his guns so that they did not end up in the wrong hands.

[51] In mid-2014 there was a further deterioration of her father’s healthand he was hospitalized again for several months. The initial diagnosis onthis attendance at the hospital from a neurologist was a muscle atrophytype of disease for which he only would have a five year life expectancy.
Her father was quite upset by this diagnosis. While in hospital in London,he attempted suicide by trying to hook up oxygen to his IV. He finally got afurther diagnosis from another doctor who indicated he did not have amuscle atrophy type of disease and was eventually released home at theend of November 2014.

[52] Ms. Green agreed there were some financial issues with her parentsbecause they were now living on her mother’s income along with a WSIB
and CPP disability pension for her father. Over Christmas 2014 there weresome visits by family. She found her father to be tired and somewhatwithdrawn, but reasonably upbeat when the grandchildren were present.
She spoke with her parents on December 27 th and everything seemedreasonably stable. That was her last conversation with them.

and parts in the garage. She was also well aware that her father took great

[53] Clifford Sauve, the son or Mr. and Mrs. Sauve, testified that his father

lockers. His father had always been involved with guns. He confirmed hisfather’s injury in 2011 and his deterioration thereafter. He was howeverable to work in the garage on his guns.

[54] He last spoke to his parents on December 27 th. His father seemedreasonably good during Christmas day while family and children wereabout.

[55] This witness testified that his father was of the view that an alarmsystem was a must, given the guns he had. He was very careful about thesecurity of his guns. In September 2014, while in the hospital, he spoke tohis son about getting the guns out of his house and he appeared quitedepressed. That never happened. Clifford Sauve was not aware of anysuicide tendency by his father.

[56] Clifford Sauve was aware that his father had a grinder in theworkshop and on occasion had noticed that grindings would be under thegrinder. He was also aware his father made his own ammunition and wouldcollect casings from gun ranges which he kept in buckets in the work shopfor recycling.

[57] The family doctor, Dr. William Wong, gave evidence and indicated

had an extensive work shop with guns, ammunition, parts, tools and

that he had been the family doctor for Mr. Sauve since 1984. He stated

had dizziness, balance issues and general deterioration of his condition. Hereceived a great deal of treatment and saw a number of differentspecialists. He was hospitalized on several occasions. He last saw thedoctor on December 16 th, 2014 prior to his wife’s murder and indicated hewas having some seizures. The doctor saw him on December 29 th, 2014,after the killing, and Mr. Sauve did not mention any cuts, bruising or otherinjuries from any beating. The doctor did not indicate that he saw any cutsor bruising. He also indicated that a CT scan of the face and head wasdone on December 29 th and was normal.

[58] Dr. Alexander Melinyshyn, an expert in neurology, gave evidenceabout his interaction with the accused in the hospital in London starting inSeptember 2014. He had a low oxygen level. He was having fainting spells,visual issues, headaches, memory and concentration issues, depressionand a general feeling of hopelessness. He did however deny any suicidalthoughts. The doctor thought his symptoms were psychiatric in nature andhe did not have epilepsy. He confirmed on September 15 th that the accusedattempted to connect oxygen to his intravenous line to give himself an airembolism and thereby commit suicide. He had a psychiatric review on

they were few medical issues prior to his accident in 2011. Thereafter, he

September 17 th, 2014 and was deemed stable.

and according to this witness, the accused felt reassured by this diagnosis.

[60] Mr. Sauve gave four voluntary statements to the police after speakingto a lawyer and being extensively cautioned.

[61] The first statement was on December 29 th, 2014 at 11:25 a.m. Heindicated in that statement that two females came up the stairs in his home.
He heard the alarm go off. He heard the siren going. He heard them yellingat his wife for the alarm code. Then one of the women was in his roombeating him. He then heard a bang which he knew was a gunshot. Theother female came into his room and gave the first female the gun and said
“shoot him or don’t shoot him.” He is not sure which. He then heard one ofthe females say it won’t shoot and she then started hitting him on the headwith the gun. The females then went downstairs but he did not hear thedoor beep go off so he thought they were still in the house and he called911.

[62] In this statement Mr. Sauve indicates “I was getting the tar beat out ofme.” The females had masks on of some sort, “like Halloween masks”. Hefurther indicated he got his right hand on the gun and was trying to take itaway from the one female. He indicated the gun was not his. He could think

[59] It was confirmed that he did not have a muscle type atrophy disease

of no reason why the two females would be in his house. He denied killing

the gunshot residue on his hand while fighting the female for the gun. Heindicated further that he called out to his wife 4 or 5 times while on the 911
call so he felt that should be on the tape. It was not. He denied this was asuicide pact. He stated his wife gave the one female the code. He then saidone of the females had yellow dish washing gloves on while the other hadno gloves. He mentioned several times during the statement that he did notshoot his wife. He confirmed that he had no enemies, no disputes withanyone and no financial issues.

[63] The accused indicated, later in this statement, that he never in factheard his wife talk. He heard the females ask for the code and then godownstairs and come back and shoot his wife but he never actually heardher give them the code. He indicated that the female that first came into hisroom had a princess mask on and something yellow on her hands. He saidit was a full rubber mask and he was trying to get it off her face. One of thegirls was quite small and skinny, about 5 feet tall while the other one wasbigger and 5’6 – 5’7 tall. He thought the bigger female was the shooter.

[64] The next statement was taken on December 29 th, 2014 at 4:22 p.m.

[65]

He again emphasises several times during this statement that he did

his wife and stated he had no reason to kill her. He further indicated he got

not shoot his wife. When he looked at the gun on the floor of his bedroom

he could hear one of the females and his wife arguing but he is not surewhat they said. He said there was no possibility his DNA could be on any ofthe casings of the bullets for the gun. He confirmed there was a 45 seconddelay time on his alarm from when the door is open to when it is activated.
He agreed that the way his wife was lying on the bed after being shot didnot look like she had been involved in any type of struggle. He admits thatshe looked at peace when she was shot. He said he was pistol whipped.
He was hit at least twice with the side of the gun. The smaller female wason the bed with him and they ended up on the floor. He ended up lying ontop of the girl on the floor and the other girl came in and kicked him in thegroin. He agreed that the pass code for the alarm was peaches.

[66] The next statement was given on January 5 th, 2015 at 3:45 p.m. henow says that the females did not go all the way downstairs and that hethought he heard them call out the code so that now he thinks that therewere perhaps 3 people in the house. He believes he heard the door chimewhen it opened which he thinks woke him. He next heard the females fromhis wife’s room saying they needed the code. Then he saw two bodies gopart way down the stairs and the alarm was cancelled. The two then

he knew it was a semi-automatic. He heard only one shot. He again says

separated. One came to his room and one went to his wife’s room. He then

but is not sure if it was one or two. He heard the larger female say “we gotto get out of here the cops are coming.” The larger female definitely had nomask on. He agreed he was incorrect when he earlier said both girls had amask on. He now says the delay on the alarm is 15 – 18 seconds and thenthe siren goes off. He believed the siren went off for 10 – 15 seconds.

[67] He further indicates in this statement that he is no longer sure that thesmaller of the two people, is female. When fighting the person with the gun,he first grabbed it with his left hand, then his other hand. He then heard hersay, “I can’t shoot him, it won’t fire.” The larger person was a brunette, earlytwenties with shoulder length hair. He heard the phone ring and someoneanswered it. This occurred while both people were in his room. The smallerperson, who was on top of him on the floor, picked up the phone and thenleft the room to answer it. He agreed from the pictures that his bed did notlook like a struggle had taken place in it. He agreed that there were twotelephones on his night table in his bedroom in the picture. After seeingthat, he said that the person who went out, took the phone out of the roomto answer it, came back and then placed the phone back on the table. Hesaid he called 911 within a minute of this incident occurring which is

remembers someone “beating the shit out of me.” He then heard a bang,

incorrect. In this statement he definitely says he heard his wife talking. He

alarm. He had no explanation for waiting 23 minutes before calling 911.

[68] The final statement was taken on February 6 th, 2015 at 3:45 p.m. andin it he states that he now thinks there were three people in the housebecause two of them never went all the way down the stairs and yetsomeone shut off the alarm. In an earlier statement, he indicated that theperson who spoke with the alarm company the night of the murder gave thewrong passcode. He said he got that information from the alarm company.
In fact he did not call the alarm company. He admits he lied about that. Hethen says in the February 6 th statement that he had his son call the alarmcompany and get that information. That also was a lie as his son neverspoke to the alarm company. When confronted with that information headmits that it might have been him who answered the phone when thealarm company called and he gave the wrong passcode. He says hedoesn’t know. He agrees that the alarm was on and the door alarm was notbroken prior to his wife being shot, contrary to his earlier statement that thedoor chime woke him. He agrees that meant someone did not come in thedoors. He further agreed that made no sense.

[69] In this statement the accused admits he got a Mauser pistol about a

agrees she was not sleeping. He agrees a gunshot would have set off the

year or two prior to this murder. He cannot remember how he got it. He did

but he doesn’t remember how. Later in the statement he says he gave itback to the person who brought it in but he doesn’t remember who thatwas.

[70] The defence admits that the alarm company had no conversationsubsequent to this murder with either the accused or his son which iscontrary to what the accused said in his statement.

POSITION OF THE DEFENCE:

[71] The Defence urges the court to find that the exculpatory statementsof the accused introduced by the Crown as part of its case should not beentirely rejected as untrue and the consistent and repeated denials of guiltby the accused support a reasonable doubt about his guilt.

[72] The Defence also argues that much of the evidence relied on by theCrown is circumstantial and to convict on that evidence the court mustconclude that the evidence it accepts is consistent with no other rationalconclusion than the guilt of the accused.
R. v. Villaroman 2016 SCC 33 at para. 25-30, 32-34:

remember the clip was not working so he fixed it and then he got rid of it

[73] The Crown argues that it has proven the guilt of Mr. Sauve beyondany reasonable doubt. The story given by the accused is not capable ofbelief when considered in conjunction with all the other evidence in thiscase and his lack of credibility with so many inconsistencies in hisstatements and should be rejected as untrue.

[74] The circumstantial evidence in this case, says the Crown, can lead toonly one conclusion when all the evidence is considered and that is theguilt of the accused. There are no other rational conclusions and those putforth by the Defence are nothing but speculations and theories withabsolutely no evidence to support any other rational conclusion except theguilt of the accused.
ANALYSIS

[75] Mr. Sauve is charged with second degree murder. The Crown musttherefore prove beyond a reasonable doubt the following:
1. Mr. Sauve caused his wife’s death.
2. Mr. Sauve caused his wife’s death unlawfully.
3. Mr. Sauve had the state of mind required for murder.

[76] The real issue in this case is whether Mr. Sauve caused his wife’s

THE POSITION OF THE CROWN:

death or, was her death caused, as he said in his statements, by two or

Sauve’s death was unlawful as it was conceded by the Defence it wascaused by two gunshot wounds to her head. There is no evidence, nor anysuggestion by the accused, that his wife shot herself. There can be nodoubt that whoever shot her, either meant to kill her or meant to cause herbodily harm and that person knew the gunshots would likely kill her or wasreckless whether she died or not. The person who shot Mrs. Sauve twice inthe head, clearly intended to kill her or meant to cause her bodily harm thatlikely would kill her. There were no other wounds to the body. As has beenstated many times by our courts, it is a matter of common sense that aperson usually knows what the predictable consequences of his or herconduct will be, and usually means to bring them about. On the facts of thiscase I have no reasonable doubt but that the person who shot Linda Sauvemeant to kill her and did so unlawfully.

[77] The real issue for the court is whether the Crown has proven beyonda reasonable doubt that the person who shot Mrs. Sauve was her husband,the accused.

[78] I have concluded that the evidence is overwhelming that the shooterwas Mr. Sauve. He was very familiar with guns. He in fact had worked on a

three unknown individuals in his house. There can be no doubt that Mrs.

Mauser semi-automatic pistol which had a defective magazine sometime

at the murder scene and similar grindings were found in his gunsmithingshop in his garage. He had gunshot residue on both of his hands. It tooktwo hands to fire the gun. His DNA was found on the gun and on the bulletin the gun and the bullet in the magazine. There was no physical indicationof a struggle in either bedroom nor was there anything to indicate any typeof a robbery in the house. Everything was neat and tidy within thebedrooms and the home itself. There was no sign of forced entry. Therewas no indication that the doors were opened by way of showing in therecords of the alarm. A gunshot would have sounded the alarm. The alarmwas quickly turned off by someone who obviously knew the code. The onlyperson who knew the code after Mrs. Sauve was shot was her husband theaccused. There was DNA from Mr. Sauve and Mrs. Sauve on the pajamabottoms. There was no robbery nor any evidence of any reason why theSauve’s would be the subject of a home invasion. The doors were closedafter the alleged invasion-and the door to Mrs. Sauve’s room was closedafter she was shot-both unusual by home invaders. The evidence wouldindicate the Sauves had no enemies. There is evidence Mr. Sauve wasdepressed as a result of his deteriorating health and that he had attempted

prior to this murder. The serial numbers were ground off the Mauser found

suicide once in hospital. There was evidence that Mrs. Sauve was worried

poor health.

[79] Mr. Sauve’s four statements are riddled with inconsistencies andadmitted lies and are simply not believable. His explanation of two or threepeople entering the house, pistol whipping him, fighting with him andshooting his wife for no reason is simply not credible and does notcorrespond with any of the physical evidence.

[80] The Crown has put forth the theory, or motive, that Mr. Sauve haddecided to kill himself but did not want to go alone so he planned to kill hiswife first, however, after killing her he either changed his mind or he couldnot get the gun to work because of the defective magazine. Whether thiswas Mr. Sauve’s thought process or not is irrelevant. The Crown is underno duty to prove motive, however, motive, if proven, is a reason whysomeone does something - it is simply part of the evidence for me toconsider. I conclude that there is also no proven absence of motive onbehalf of Mr. Sauve which may go to support his denial of guilt.

[81]

I also acknowledge the evidence of the police that one of their

members was timed in getting from the accused bedroom to the alarm byusing the accused’s wheelchair and it took him 52 seconds which was

about her husband and he indicated he did not want to live as he was in

longer than the evidence of the time the alarm was activated until shut off.

nor was there any video recording of the demonstration to allow the court tosee the details of this demonstration. There was no evidence as to howfamiliar the officer was with wheelchairs, the stair lift or the alarm system. I
also note the discrepancy between the evidence of Mr. Holgate and Mr.Radu as to whether the alarm could be turned off remotely by the fob. I givelittle weight to this evidence and it certainly does not raise any reasonabledoubt in my mind as to the guilt of Mr. Sauve.

[82] I have considered the submissions of the Defence that crosscontamination of the DNA from the gun to the bullets in the gun andmagazine was caused by Detective Huhtanen in handling those objectsand this should raise reasonable doubt regarding that DNA evidence. I
reject that argument as speculation. The officer was very experienced andwas well aware of the issue of cross contamination. He clearly rememberschanging gloves whenever he touched a new piece of evidence. He notedthat in his notebook although not every time he did so. His evidence wasclear and straight forward. He had a good memory of events. He wasskillfully cross-examined and remained consistent throughout his evidence,except for a couple of minor and inconsequential discrepancies with his

The officer who performed the actual demonstration did not give evidence,

evidence at the preliminary inquiry. I accept the evidence of Detective

accept the DNA evidence as accurate.

[83] I have reviewed the case of R v. WD., [1991] 1 S.C.R. 742. I ampersuaded beyond any doubt, that the accused is guilty based upon theevidence that the Crown has led and which I accept. There is no evidencefrom the accused’s statements or cross-examinations that raises any doubtin my mind as to his guilt. There is also no evidence which I have notaccepted which raises any doubt as to the guilt of the accused. I reject theaccused’s consistent denials of guilt in his statements as untrue. I thereforefind Mr. Sauve guilty of the second degree murder of his wife.

___________________________
Arrell J.

Huhtanen as accurate and do not accept that there is any reason not to

ONTARIO

B E T W E E N:
Her Majesty the QueenCynthia Jennison
-

and –

Clark Eric SauveJames Marentette

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

HAS

Released:

May 30, 2017

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

