IMPORTANT: CONTENTS CANNOT BE PUBLISHED OR
BROADCASTED PURSUANT TO AN ORDER UNDER SECTION
486 OF THE CRIMINAL CODE OF CANADA BY HIS WORSHIP
JUSTICE OF THE PEACE LEGAULT AND HIS HONOUR JUSTICE
RENAUD. Ontario Court of Justice dated: December 19, 2013 andSeptember 26, 2014
ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
– and –
J-C.M.
Accused

Isabel Blanchard , counsel for the Crown

D. Nugent counsel for the Accused

HEARD: April 3, 2017

REASONS FOR SENTENCE
LACELLE, J.

Introduction

[1]

The accused, J-C. M., is before me for sentencing having been found guilty following atrial of the offences of indecent assault and gross indecency.

[2]

The offences occurred in 1971. The victim is the accused’s younger brother.

[3]

The accused is now 69 years old. He comes before the court as a first offender.

[4]

The issue I must decide is the appropriate sentence, having regard to the circumstances ofthe offence and the accused, and all the relevant principles of sentencing.

CITATION: R. v. J-C.M, 2017 ONSC 3179
COURT FILE NO.: 14-90
DATE: 20170524

[5]

The offences occurred when the victim was 14-15 years old, while the accused was 23.
Over a 3-4 month period during the spring of 1971, the accused went to the victim’s bedroomduring the night, woke him up, and took him back to the accused’s bedroom in the familyhome. At the time, the accused had been working for a number of years and he had returnedto the family home following a period when he had worked in another province.

[6]

The victim was required to perform oral sex on the accused, and the accused alsoperformed oral sex on him. The accused rubbed his penis between the victim’s buttocks, anact which hurt the victim, and the victim performed this act on the accused. The sexual abusecame to an end following the complainant’s disclosure to his mother, and the accused’smeeting with one of his uncles.

[7]

While the precise number of times these sexual offences occurred was not clear, I foundthat the conduct was repeated.

The circumstances of the accused

[8]

In addition to the information about the accused which was presented during the courseof the trial, the court has the benefit of a Pre-Sentence Report and a sexual behavioursassessment of the accused. The author of the PSR found that the accused was a suitablecandidate for a community disposition. The author of the sexual behaviours assessmentconcluded the accused was a low-risk to reoffend.

[9]

In addition to these opinions, the reports provide the court with additional informationabout the accused. The accused has limited education. He had problems reading and writing,and he remains functionally illiterate. He describes himself as having been “slow” and herepeatedly failed grades at school. He was assessed as having a learning disorder by theauthor of the sexual behaviours assessment.

[10] The accused left school in the sixth grade, when he was sixteen, and sought employment.
He worked consistently since that time, until he suffered a back injury, which still troubleshim. He suffers from degenerating discs in his back, and uses medication as a result. He alsosees a chiropractor. He currently supports himself with his government pensions.

[11] The PSR confirms the accused is a father and grand-father. He also has step-children.
Many of these individuals have filed letters of support for the accused. He is described in thePSR by his daughter and step-son as a great father and loving man, who made the best of hiscircumstances, working hard to provide for his family despite his inability to read or write.
He has raised his children to be responsible, self-sufficient adults.

[12] The accused is now in a relationship with a woman who is his common-law spouse. It is asupportive relationship. The accused’s spouse described the accused as loving, caring,respectful, and always willing to help others.

The circumstances of the offences

[14] While the PSR is largely positive, a different view of the accused emerged in thecomments made by the victim, and the accused’s younger brother F.M. F.M. also noted thatthe offences have caused a rift in their family, because it is the victim who stays away atfamily functions, and not the accused.

[15] As far as mental health is concerned, the accused was described as not presenting anymental health issues in the sexual behaviours assessment. There are also no substance abuseissues in his history. He has no sexual disorders. Actuarial testing resulted in an aboveaverage score on the Paulhus Deception Scale, which indicates that compared to the generalpopulation, the accused has a tendency to present himself in an overly-positive light andtends to minimize his own personal shortcomings. He scored in the “low” risk category onthe Static-2002R. Compared to other adult males, his score in the 4th percentile means thathis risk of offending in the next 5 years is 1%. Given that he has not re-offended in almost 50
years, the author of the assessment concluded that the accused’s true risk of re-offence iseven lower. From a psychiatric perspective, the accused does not require psychiatrictreatment. According to the author of the sexual behaviours assessment, the likelihood of theaccused receiving treatment if incarcerated will be impacted by the assessment of his verylow risk to reoffend, due to a belief that “low risk offenders become high risk if they havecontact within correctional treatment facilities”. Nevertheless, the accused has indicated he iswilling to attend any counselling the court might order.
The principles of sentencing

[16] The Criminal Code sets out a number of principles of sentencing which must beconsidered in determining a fit sentence. The fundamental purpose of sentencing isconfirmed in s. 718. That section provides that the sanction imposed by the court should haveone or more of the following objectives:
a. To denounce unlawful conduct;b. To deter the offender and other persons from committing offences;c. To separate offenders from society, where necessary;d. To assist in rehabilitating offenders;e. To provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community; andf.

To promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of theharm done to victims and to the community.

[17] In sentencing an offender, s. 718.1 provides that the court must adhere to the fundamentalprinciple of ensuring that the sentence imposed is proportionate to the gravity of the offence

[13] The accused himself has a history of being victimized sexually. He reports a history ofsexual touching by his cousins. In the PSR, he is noted to rationalize or minimize hisbehaviour given this experience.

and the degree of responsibility of the offender. Section 718.2 of the Code identifiesadditional principles of sentencing, including that the court should increase or decrease thesentence to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating factors.
These principles govern the court’s analysis.

Analysis

[19] The accused seeks a conditional sentence of two years less a day, with strict termsimposing house arrest. His counsel argues that a conditional sentence is sufficient to addressall the sentencing objectives in this case, particularly given the positive and pro-social life theaccused has led since the offences. Counsel also relies on other circumstances, including theaccused’s health difficulties, in arguing that this an exceptional case warranting a conditionalsentence. Counsel argues the accused has expressed remorse. He also argues that thesuggestion in the risk assessment that the accused is still in denial about the offences reflectsthe fact that he is a slow learner. He highlights the low risk posed by the accused at the time,and the positive comments about the accused in letters of support he has filed. He argues thatif the court were to impose a custodial sentence, this would impact upon the accused’s spousegiven her financial means and her disability. He argues that the accused is slow intellectually,and that he had the mentality of a younger person at the time of the offence because of hiscognitive delay.

[20] The Crown seeks a sentence of 3-5 years in the penitentiary, and submits that thesentence should be at the higher end of that range. She opposes a conditional sentence on thebasis that it would not satisfy the principles of denunciation and deterrence. In part this isbecause a conditional sentence, even with house arrest terms, would not significantly changethe accused’s routine. She urges that imposing a lenient sentence because of the passage oftime could be seen by the community as judicial condonation of the conduct. She argues thatany expression of remorse by the accused is severely tempered by his comment that he isdisappointed that the victim came forward to police with his allegation, and his lack ofempathy for the victim.

[21] A number of considerations impact the analysis in this case, and I will address them inturn.

The aggravating and mitigating factorsThe aggravating factors

[22] In my reasons for judgment, I found that the complainant was a 14-15 year old teen-agerand still a child when the acts were committed. The accused, who would have been 23 yearsold, took advantage of the complainant’s youth and immaturity, as well as his relationship ashis older brother, when he initiated this conduct. At the time of the offences, the accused hadleft the house and had worked various jobs, including work outside of the province. He hadbeen engaged to be married. In the absence of the father in the family’s life, he was involved

[18]

[23] With regard to the defence argument that the accused was cognitively delayed to thepoint where he had the mentality of a younger person when he committed the offences, thereis insufficient evidence to support that conclusion. While I accept that the accused haddifficulties learning, everything else about his life at the time of the offences and his lifesince confirms that he has functioned in the community as an adult who was capable ofunderstanding right from wrong. I am not satisfied that his moral blameworthiness for theseoffences is diminished by any learning disability or other cognitive issue or by his level ofmaturity at the time of the offences.

[24] It is also aggravating that the victim was a child when these events occurred. Both thebreach of trust and the victim’s age are specifically referenced as aggravating factors in theCriminal Code. As a child, the victim should have felt safe in his own home, in his own bed.
Instead, he was abused by an older member of his own family.

[25] The significant impact of these offences on the victim is also an aggravating factor. Thevictim read his Victim Impact Statement to the court. It makes plain that the offences havehad a life-long and life altering impact upon him. He is now 59 years old, and he says that theabuse has destroyed his life. He has suffered from depression, anxiety, insomnia, and PTSD,to the point where he has contemplated ending his life. He continues to experienceflashbacks. His shame and confusion about what happened took time for him to overcome. Inthe meantime, his life as an adolescent, a husband, and a father were all affected. His feelingsof safety in his community were impacted, and he has avoided various situations for fear ofencountering the accused. He has missed out on events with his family, and his relationshipwith his extended family has been deeply altered by the abuse because he has been told heshould just get over what happened. He has tried all manner of ways to heal from this,including counselling, and he continues to struggle.

[26] The victim’s daughter also filed a Victim Impact Statement. Her statement makes clearthat the impact of the abuse in this case has been inter-generational. Her father was notpresent for her as a child in the way he might otherwise have been. Her relationship with herextended family has also suffered. As she puts it, the offences have ruined their familydynamic. Witnessing her father’s pain and supporting him through the trial process hascaused her to experience her own mental health difficulties.

The mitigating factors

[27] There are a number of mitigating factors in this case. The accused has no priorconvictions. He has led a pro-social life in the more than forty years since the offences. Hehas a lengthy history of employment, despite his limited education and illiteracy. He nowcontributes to his community by his volunteer work in his housing co-op. He has substantial

in reinforcing the authority of his mother with his younger siblings. He was an adult in everysense of the word, and in a position of trust, when he took advantage of his much youngerbrother.

community and family support, and by all accounts he has been a good father, grandfather,and spouse. He is willing to attend treatment. He is very low-risk to re-offend. He has somehealth issues for which he receives treatment. He is an offender who has excellentrehabilitative prospects, if he is not rehabilitated already, and he is unlikely to come beforethe court again. I consider all of these factors in determining the appropriate sentence in thiscase.

[28] The issue of the accused’s remorse, which might function as a mitigating factor, is notstraightforward in this case. The author of the PSR was of the view that the accused appearedto lack empathy for the victim, since he stated that he was “disappointed” that his brotherreported the abuse. At the same time, the accused told the author of the PSR that he wassorry, as he did in his letter to the victim years ago. However, in her letter in support filed onthe sentencing hearing, the accused’s spouse indicates that the accused told her that sendingthe letter was a “big mistake”, and that it was written in order to apologize “in order for thismatter to be closed as promised by his brother”.

[29] While the accused admitted to the acts he performed with the victim during the course ofthe trial, he maintained the victim had consented to them. This view was also communicatedduring the sexual behaviours assessment, where the accused maintained that no offence hadbeen committed because the sexual contact was consensual.

[30] The evidence of the accused’s remorse is thus mixed. While I accept that the accused hassaid he is sorry that these events occurred, I find that the accused does not have any genuineinsight into the impact of these events upon the victim. So while I accord some weight to theexpressions of remorse the accused has made, this mitigating factor in the sentencing analysisdoes not have the same force as in a case where there is evidence the accused takes fullresponsibility for the harm he has caused.
The age of the offences and the passage of time

[31] I have considered the historic nature of the offences here in accordance with theprinciples previously elaborated in the case law. That is, the passage of time or the age of theoffence is irrelevant to sentencing in terms of the gravity of the offence. It does not diminishthe need for a denunciatory sentence.

[32] The passage of time is relevant to specific deterrence and the rehabilitation of theoffender. The time between the offences and the court proceedings may show that theaccused poses little risk of re-offending and impact on the assessment of what is requirednow to protect the safety of the community: see for instance R. v. B.(R.), [2003] O.J. No.
3450 (C.J.) at para. 58 citing R. v. M. (V.), [1999] O.J. No. 2580 (S.C.J.); R. v. J.R., [2003]
O.J. No. 3458 (C.A.) at para. 1; R. v. Spence, [1992] A.J. No. 1129 at p. 4 (Q.L.) (Alta.C.A.).
That has been the case here. The passage of time and the absence of any offending behaviourby the accused demonstrates that he does not require specific deterrence. The passage of timealso demonstrates that whatever rehabilitation may have been appropriate at the time of theseoffences is no longer necessary.

[33] A conditional sentence is available in this case because of the historic nature of theoffences and the accused’s s. 11(i) Charter right to the benefit of any lesser punishment sincethe time of the commission of the offence. At the time of the offences, the sentencing regimedid not provide for any minimum sentences. Given the maximum sentence of 5 years foreach offence, the accused is eligible for a conditional sentence.

[34] In considering whether a conditional sentence is fit in this case, I consider that the Courtof Appeal for Ontario has repeatedly reaffirmed its direction that a conditional sentenceshould rarely be imposed in cases involving the sexual touching of children by adults,particularly where the sexual violation is of a vulnerable victim by a person in a position oftrust: R. v. D.R., [2003] O.J. No. 561 at para. 8; R. v. Cromien, [2002] O.J. No. 354 at para. 7.
This is in keeping with its earlier direction that even if certain pre-conditions for aconditional sentence are satisfied, this does not compel the imposition of a conditionalsentence: R. v. G.O., [1997] O.J. No. 1911 at paras. 6 and 14.

[35]

I am not satisfied that this is one of those rare cases that warrant a conditional sentence.
While I find that the accused is not a risk to the community and a conditional sentencewould not endanger the safety of the community, I am not satisfied that a conditionalsentence would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencingset out in sections 718 and 718.2 of the Criminal Code.

[36] I arrive at this conclusion after considering a number of issues. I consider that theseoffences have caused significant harm to the victim, who continues to suffer from theireffects even decades later. These offences have been life-altering for him and his family. Asnoted in R. v. Woodward, 2011 ONCA 610 at para. 76,
[W]hen trial judges are sentencing adult sexual predators who have exploitedinnocent children, the focus of the sentencing hearing should be on the harm tothe child by the offender’s conduct and the life-altering consequences that can andoften do flow from it. While the effects of a conviction on the offender and theoffender’s prospects for rehabilitation will always warrant consideration, theobjectives of denunciation, deterrence and the need to separate sexual predatorsfrom society for society’s well-being and the well-being of our children must takeprecedence.

[37]

I also consider the seriousness of the offences and the circumstances in which they werecommitted. The offences involved invasive sexual acts on a child, and the abuse of aposition of trust. While the precise number of occasions the offences occurred is notpossible to determine, I am satisfied the conduct was repeated. In other words, it was notan isolated event.

[38]

The nature and seriousness of these offences require the court to give primacy to theprinciples of denunciation and deterrence, and for the court to make clear with itssentence that sexual offending against children, particularly by a person in a position of

The availability and fitness of a conditional sentence

[39]

In arriving at this conclusion, I am mindful that the Supreme Court of Canada hasconfirmed that a conditional sentence may provide significant denunciation anddeterrence, particularly when onerous conditions are imposed: R. v. Proulx, 2000 SCC 5
at paras. 102 and 107. Further, I have considered that in one of the companion cases toProulx, R. v. W. (L.F.), 2000 SCC 6, which was also a case of historic sexual abuse of achild by a family member, Lamer C.J.C., writing for four members of the court, upheldthe trial judge’s conditional sentence order (even while he indicated at para. 25 that hemight have imposed a sentence of incarceration).

[40]

I have also considered that a conditional sentence has been imposed by judges in othercases where similar sexual acts were committed by offenders who were in a trust positiontowards their victim. This result has been achieved or upheld in some instances in theCourt of Appeal (see R. v. Esmonde, [2002] O.J. No. 2544 and R. v. C. (A.), 2012
ONCA). I have reviewed the cases submitted by the defence carefully. For the most part,the cases resulting in a conditional sentence involved compelling mitigating factors thatare not present in this case, such as a guilty plea by the offender. In at least one case, R. v.
Erlich, 2015 ONCJ 151, in addition to a guilty plea by the accused, there was evidencethat the court proceedings had resulted in widespread knowledge and publiccondemnation of the accused’s crimes, which lead the trial judge to conclude thatdenunciation and deterrence were “loudly and publicly present” in that case. There is nosuch evidence here.

[41]

As regards the submission that the accused’s health and the circumstances of theaccused’s spouse support this sentencing order, I do not view those circumstances assufficiently compelling to favour the imposition of a conditional sentence. It is notunusual for an offender to come before the court with health concerns. There is noevidence in this case that the accused’s health concerns will not be addressed by custodialauthorities if he is incarcerated.

[42]

With respect to the care the accused provides to his spouse, the materials filed todemonstrate the extent of the disability of the accused’s spouse also show that she hasreceived significant support from her daughter and a friend in the past, and that she livedwith her disability without the assistance of the accused prior to 2013. I expect she willbe supported by her family and friends if the accused is no longer able to perform thatfunction. In any case, as stated in R. v. A.G., [2002] O.J. No. 5449 (S.C.J.) at paras. 43
and 77, where a similar conclusion was reached about an offender who cared for his illninety-year old mother, the needs of a person cared for by the accused are not a reasonwhy the accused “should not serve the sentence which his crimes deserve”.

Conclusion

trust, is abhorrent to this community and will result in significant sanction: s.718.01 ofthe Criminal Code, R. v. D. (D.)(2002), 58 O.R. (3d) 788 (C.A.); R. v. Woodward, 2011
ONCA 610; R. v. D.M., [2012] O.J. No. 3616 (C.A.). While in some cases a conditionalsentence might adequately send that message, I am not satisfied that such a sentence inthis case would do so.

[43]

The range for sentences for similar conduct committed by similarly placed offenders isset out in the authorities provided by counsel. No case is exactly like this one, and I haveconsidered cases that are most similar to this one in deciding on the length of the sentenceto be imposed here: see for instance R. v. Vincent, [2014] ONSC 1068, B. (R.) and W.
(L.F.). I have also considered the range of sentence identified in D.D. for adult offenderswho, in a position of trust, sexually abuse children on a regular and persistent basis oversubstantial periods of time. As I have said, it is not clear how often the offences occurredin this case. The maximum period of time over which the offences might have occurred is3-4 months. I do not view the facts here as requiring the imposition of a mid to uppersingle digit penitentiary term.

[44]

In the final analysis, I have determined that a sentence of 2 years less a day in custody isappropriate. While I have considered a probationary term, given the conclusions in thesexual behaviours assessment that the accused does not need treatment, and given thetime he has spent on bail prior to trial without incident, I am not convinced that aprobation order would have any rehabilitative benefit or that it would further protect thepublic.

[45]

The sentence will be as follows: on count one, the accused shall be sentenced to a periodof 2 years less a day. On count 2 the accused shall be sentenced to 2 years less a dayconcurrent to count 1.

[46]

There will be a s. 109 order for 10 years. There will be a SOIRA order for life. There willalso be an order requiring the accused to provide a sample of his DNA to the authorities.

[47]

With respect to the Crown’s request for an order under s. 161, I consider that the accusedhas been assessed as a very low risk to re-offend, and that he has not offended in anumber of decades since the offences. I also consider that he is now a grandfather. As I
have indicated, I do not find that the accused poses a danger to the community. In thecircumstances, I will not make an order under s. 161.

Madam Justice Laurie LacelleReleased: May 24, 2017

IMPORTANT: CONTENTS CANNOT BE PUBLISHED OR
BROADCASTED PURSUANT TO AN ORDER UNDER SECTION 486 OF
THE CRIMINAL CODE OF CANADA BY HIS WORSHIP JUSTICE OF
THE PEACE LEGAULT AND HIS HONOUR JUSTICE RENAUD. OntarioCourt of Justice dated: December 19, 2013 and September 26, 2014

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN

– and –

J-C.M.

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

Madam Justice Laurie Lacelle

Released: May 24, 2017

R. v. J-C.M, 2017 ONSC 3179
COURT FILE NO.: 14-90
DATE: 20170524

