CITATION: R. v. Coplin-Duran, 2017 ONSC 2649
COURT FILE NO.: CR/17/10000/1790000
DATE: 20170510

BETWEEN:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
- and ERIC COPLIN-DURAN

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

Emily Marrocco, for the Crown

Daniel Michael, for Mr. Coplin-Duran

HEARD: April 10, 11, 19 and 20, 2017
KELLY J.
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

[1]
Mr. Eric Coplin-Duran has been charged with a number of offences arising from aR.I.D.E. stop on July 5, 2014 in the City of Toronto. After an Ontario Provincial Police
(“OPP”) officer smelled marijuana, Mr. Coplin-Duran (the driver) and Mr. Nathaniel Bell
(the passenger) were removed from the car, a Honda vehicle. Found hidden in the console onthe passenger side, were two loaded firearms and 29 grams of marijuana. Smaller amountsof marijuana were found in the side pocket of the driver’s side door. Both were charged.

[2]
Mr. Bell absconded a number of months before trial and was arrested on April 6,2017 – four days before this trial began. Mr. Bell’s charges were severed and Mr. CoplinDuran proceeded to trial before me, sitting alone. He was tried on the following offences:

Count

Charge

Criminal CodeSection

1

Possession of a loaded prohibited weapon: a Lorcin L25.

95(1)

2

Possession of a loaded prohibited weapon: an IverJohnson, Model – Safety Hammer Automatic revolver.

95(1)

-2-

Charge

3

Occupy a motor vehicle in which he knew there was aprohibited firearm: an Iver Johnson, Model – SafetyHammer Automatic revolver.

94(1)

4

Occupy a motor vehicle in which he knew there was aprohibited firearm: a Lorcin L25.

94(1)

5

Possession of a firearm (an Iver Johnson, Model – SafetyHammer Automatic revolver) knowing that it was obtainedby the commission of an offence.

96(1)

[3]
Mr. Coplin-Duran is also charged on a separate indictment with two counts ofunlawfully possessing a firearm while prohibited pursuant to a s. 110 order made onSeptember 19, 2013. The offences are alleged to have been committed contrary to s. 117.01
of the Criminal Code.

[4]
At trial, several OPP officers testified. Mr. Bell (the former co-accused) testified andan Agreed Statement of Facts (“ASF”) was filed. Mr. Coplin-Duran did not testify. No otherwitnesses were called by the defence.

[5]
The issue to be determined in this case is whether Crown Counsel has proven beyonda reasonable doubt that Mr. Coplin-Duran had knowledge of the two firearms in the Honda. I
find that he did.

[6]

Mr. Coplin-Duran is convicted of all charges. What follows are my reasons.

Analysis

[7]
As I have stated above, the real issue to be determined in this case is whether CrownCounsel has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Coplin-Duran had knowledge of thetwo firearms in the Honda. All of the other essential elements of the offences have beenproven beyond a reasonable doubt, mainly as a result of the ASF filed. I have attached acopy of the ASF as Appendix “A” to these reasons.
The Primary Facts

[8]
This is a circumstantial case and as such, I will start with my analysis of the primaryfacts from which I draw my inferences. (The letters in each title below correspond to theprimary facts in paragraph 23 that follows.)
a.

Messrs. Coplin-Duran and Bell were acquaintances.

Count

Criminal CodeSection

[9]
There is no doubt that Messrs. Coplin-Duran and Bell were acquaintances of somesort. Mr. Bell testified that as of the date of trial, they had known each other for a period ofapproximately two years. They had met through a mutual friend. On occasion, Mr. CoplinDuran would drive Mr. Bell to and from various locations. That is what happened that day.
Mr. Coplin-Duran had driven Mr. Bell to the hospital because he had injured his hand. Mr.Bell got his own ride home. Hours later, Mr. Coplin-Duran picked up Mr. Bell. They hadsomething to eat. When stopped by R.I.D.E., they were on their way to see a friend.
b.

Mr. Bell’s hand was bandaged.

[10] Mr. Bell testified that, on the date in question, he had cut the base of his thumb. Hehad attended at the hospital and he required stitches. He said that he was in a cast for about2-3 weeks. I accept this evidence as true. One of the OPP officers observed the bandaging.
c.

On the date in question, Mr. Coplin-Duran was driving a Honda,Mr. Bell was the passenger. Both were nervous.

[11] Various officers testified about arresting both Messrs. Coplin-Duran and Bell afterbeing stopped by R.I.D.E. Mr. Coplin-Duran was driving the Honda. Mr. Bell was sitting inthe front passenger seat. OPP Officer Tara Bolstad noticed that Mr. Bell was bent over at thewaist. She could not see his hands and what he was doing.

[12] Officer Bolstad described both Messrs. Coplin-Duran and Bell as nervous, althoughMr. Bell was more so. Mr. Bell was “shaking uncontrollably”. Mr. Coplin-Duran appeared
“generally nervous” which she conceded is typical when someone is being arrested.
d.

Mr. Coplin-Duran is the registered owner of the Honda.

[13] Mr. Coplin-Duran was the registered owner of the Honda at the time of his arrest.
The ASF states as follows:
A search of Ontario Ministry of Transportation documentsconducted on April 11 2016 showed that the Honda vehiclewith licence plate BTMW 129 was at that time registered toEric M. Coplin [the defendant], with an address of 607-40
Falstaff Avenue, Toronto Ontario M6L 2E1. This vehicle wasalso registered to Mr. Coplin-Duran on July 5 2014.
e.-j.

[14]
true.

Marijuana and firearms were found in the Honda

Mr. Bell testified that there was marijuana in the Honda. I accept this evidence as

[15] At the R.I.D.E. stop and when the window of the Honda was rolled down, the officerssaid that they “smelled” or “saw” weed (marijuana). The ASF confirms this and provided asfollows: “The green leafy substances and flakes seized in the car were all sent to HealthCanada for analysis, and all tested as marihuana.”

-3-

[16] I also accept the evidence of P.C. Vincent Hick, a member of the OPP Canine Unit.
That night, he was working with his dog “Cash”. He and Cash were called to the scene ofthe R.I.D.E. stop in an effort to detect narcotics. Cash is also qualified to detect firearms.
That is what he did when he entered the Honda. Cash found both marijuana and firearms init.

[17]

When Cash entered the Honda, the following occurred:
a.

Cash picked up on the scent of two bags of marijuana in the pocket of thedriver’s side door. P.C. Hick retrieved the bags containing 8 and 9 grams ofmarijuana respectively.

b.

Cash picked up on the scent of a second firearm located in the cavity of thecentre console on the passenger side, closest to the passenger seat: the IverJohnson. When P.C. Hick pulled back the plastic from the base of theconsole, he was able to retrieve the firearm that was facing barrel down.

c.

Cash picked up on the scent of a firearm in the cavity of the same centreconsole, but closer to the passenger side foot well underneath the glove box.
When P.C. Hick tugged at the corner of the console from the bottom, anotherfirearm fell out. Again, its barrel was pointing down.

d.

Lastly, Cash picked up on the scent of another bag of marijuana in the cavityof the same centre console. It was closer to the back of the passenger seat.
P.C. Hick opened the console, again from the bottom, and a third bag ofmarijuana was found. It contained 29 grams.

[18] These facts lead to the conclusion that there were two firearms and marijuana foundin the cavity of the centre console in three different locations. Marijuana in two smalleramounts was found in the driver’s side door.
k.

Mr. Bell’s DNA was found on a firearm.

[19] Mr. Bell’s DNA was found on the Iver-Johnson firearm located in the console, closestto the passenger seat (as opposed to the foot well). The ASF provides as follows:
i.

DC Tibay swabbed the guns for DNA and sent the samples to theCentre of Forensic Sciences (the “CFS”). The samples were analyzedby biologist James Currie, who produced a report dated November 9,2015.

ii.

Biologist Currie determined that there was DNA suitable forcomparison on the Iver Johnson firearm. Biologist Currie concludedthat the probability that Nathaniel Bell was not the contributor of thisDNA was a 1 in 12 quadrillion chance. In plain language, heconcluded that Nathaniel Bell’s DNA was on the Iver Johnson firearm.

-4-

[20] When Mr. Bell was asked how his DNA was found on one of the firearms in theHonda he provided an explanation. He testified that his thumb was bleeding when he waspicked up by Mr. Coplin-Duran. When he put his seat belt on, the blood dripped from hisinjury and that is how his DNA got on the firearm. He further testified that he did not seeany firearms in the Honda that night so he could not have touched them.

[21] Neither counsel asked me to accept Mr. Bell’s evidence regarding the DNA asreliable. I agree and I do not. Mr. Bell’s evidence as to how the DNA got on the firearm isillogical. It is also contradicted by a subsequent finding of biologist Currie that was providedto the Court following the completion of Mr. Bell’s evidence.

[22] Crown Counsel advised that biologist Currie “weighed in” on the issue as to whetheror not the DNA got on to the firearm because a drop of blood dripped from Mr. Bell’s injuredhand. He confirmed that the DNA profile on the firearm was not amplified by a bloodsample.

[23] Based on the abovementioned analysis and the ASF, the following are the primaryfacts which I accept:
a.

Messrs. Coplin-Duran and Bell were acquaintances.

b.

On the date of arrest, Mr. Bell had suffered an injury to his hand and it wasbandaged.

c.

At the time of the R.I.D.E. stop, Mr. Coplin-Duran was driving the Honda.
Mr. Bell was in the passenger seat and bent over. Both appeared nervous butMr. Bell appeared more so.

d.

A Honda motor vehicle was registered to Mr. Coplin-Duran at the time.

e.

There were two loaded firearms found in the cavity of the centre console ofthe Honda: on the passenger side of it. One was found adjacent to thepassenger seat. The second was found closer to the foot well on the passengerside.

f.

The two firearms were within arm’s reach of both Mr. Coplin-Duran from thedriver’s seat and Mr. Bell from the passenger seat.

g.

Both firearms were loaded. One had a bullet in the chamber.

h.

The firearms were accessed, by the OPP who searched the Honda, from thebase of the centre console.

i.

The two firearms had their barrels facing down when located.

j.

Marijuana was found in the side pocket of the driver’s side door and the cavityof the centre console. Flakes of marijuana were also found in plain view.

-5-

-6-

k.

One of the firearms (the Iver-Johnson) has traces of DNA from Mr. Bell.

[24] The evidence in this case is circumstantial. As such, I can only convict Mr. CoplinDuran if I am satisfied that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the circumstantialevidence is guilt. I am so satisfied.

[25] In coming to my conclusion of Mr. Coplin-Duran’s guilt, I remind myself of theprinciples that I must consider in a case such as this. 1 Because circumstantial evidencerequires inferential reasoning, it is important that I consider the reasonable alternativeinferences in assessing the strength of the circumstantial evidence. In doing so, I remindmyself of the following principle: am I satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the onlyrational inference that can be drawn from the circumstantial evidence is that the accused isguilty?2 Any inference I draw must be one that can be “reasonably and logically drawn; itcannot depend on speculation or conjecture, rather than evidence, to bridge any inferentialgaps”.3

[26] Further, I remind myself that circumstantial evidence is not to be evaluated piece bypiece, but rather it is to be considered cumulatively. A trier of fact’s application of logic,common sense and experience to the evidence engages consideration of both inherentprobabilities and inherent improbabilities and, not infrequently, eliminating the likelihood ofcoincidence.4

[27] I also adopt the wisdom of McEachern C.J.B.C. in the case of R. v. To. He stated asfollows:
It must be remembered that we are not expected to treat reallife cases as a completely intellectual exercise where noconclusion can be reached if there is the slightest competingpossibility. The criminal law requires a very high degree ofproof especially for inferences consistent with guilt, but it doesnot demand certainty. I do not think it can be properly said thatthe inferences of knowledge in this case would be unreasonableor unsupported by the evidence.5

[28] Counsel for Mr. Coplin-Duran submits that there is a reasonable inference to bedrawn from the primary facts that lead to the acquittal of Mr. Coplin-Duran. That is this:
when Mr. Bell realized the Honda was being stopped by the R.I.D.E. program, heimmediately secreted the firearms in the cavity of the centre console. This is consistent withOfficer Bolstad who saw him bent over while seated in the front passenger seat and a firearm

1

See: R. v. Al-Kisadi, 2011 ONSC 6412 where I considered these principles in a circumstantial case.
See: R. v. Griffin and Harris (2009), 244 C.C.C. (3d) 289 (S.C.C.) at paras. 33-34
34
See: R. v. Consulo, [2011] O.J. No. 4204 (S.C.J.) at paras. 234 and 235
5

[1992] B.C.J. No. 1700. See also: U.S.A. v. Huynh (2005), 200 C.C.C. (3d) 305 (Ont. C.A.)
2

The Inferences to be Drawn from the Primary Facts

-7-

[29] To accept Mr. Coplin-Duran’s submission would be to accept the following:
Mr. Bell, with one hand injured and in a cast, entered the Honda with two loaded firearms.
He possessed them as they dined in one location and got into the Honda to go to a friend’s –
all while in the company of Mr. Coplin-Duran and unnoticed by him. When they saw theR.I.D.E. program, Mr. Bell took the two firearms off his person. He pulled out the plastic ofthe centre console and placed one firearm in the cavity next to him and one in the cavity nearthe foot well of the Honda. This does not make sense.

[30] Mr. Bell would have to know that the cavity of the console was hollow and that itcould be retracted to insert and hold the firearms. He would have had to secret the itemsbetween the time they saw the OPP, were pulled over and the OPP officer approached - allwhile wearing a cast on one of his hands. He would have had to place the firearmsindividually in the console because they were found in two different locations.

[31] I find that the reasonable inference to draw from the primary facts is that the firearmswere put in the cavity of the console and that Mr. Coplin-Duran had knowledge of them. I
agree that not everyone who drives a motor vehicle with concealed objects necessarily knowsof the presence or nature of the items concealed in it. More than simple proximity isrequired.6 There is more in this case:

6

a.

Mr. Coplin-Duran is the owner of the Honda. He was driving it at the timeand his passenger was his acquaintance, Mr. Bell. Mr. Bell had a cast on onehand resulting from an injury attended to at the hospital earlier that day. Itwould have been difficult for Mr. Bell to secret the firearms in two differentlocations during the time between seeing the OPP and the approach by theOPP officer, especially with one injured hand.

b.

The firearms were located close to Mr. Coplin-Duran, even if they were in theconsole closer to the passenger side of the Honda where Mr. Bell was seated.

c.

There was marijuana found in the pocket of the driver’s side door in twoseparate packages, in two small quantities (8 and 9 grams respectively). Therewas a larger bag of marijuana (29 grams) found in the same cavity as the twoloaded firearms. The inference to be drawn is that Mr. Coplin-Duran hadknowledge of both.

d.

The proximity of the firearm to the marijuana might suggest that the firearmswere meant to protect a drug dealer from the loss of the drugs and theproceeds of sale. The firearms and marijuana were next to Mr. Coplin-Duranas he drove the Honda.

See: R. v. Amado, [1996] B.C.J. No. 1943 (S.C.) at para. 33

being found in the foot well. The Iver Johnson was found near the gear box adjacent to Mr.Bell’s hands and knees. I do not accept this submission.

e.

The manner in which the firearms were secreted together with the marijuanawas designed to keep all three items out of view while maintaining access tothem. Although concealed, the three items were readily accessible to anoccupant of the Honda.7 The items had to be secreted by a person who knewthe cavity was hollow. Mr. Coplin-Duran was the owner and driver of theHonda at the time.

Conclusion

[32] In my view, the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the above noted facts isthat Mr. Coplin-Duran had knowledge of the firearms secreted in the Honda. As such, he isguilty of all counts on the indictment.

___________________________
Kelly J.
Released: May 10, 2017

7

See: R. v. McIntosh [2003] O.J. No. 1267

-8-

Appendix “A”

R v Eric Coplin-DuranDRAFT Agreed Statement of FactsVehicle Ownership1. A search of Ontario Ministry of Transportation documents conducted onApril 11 2016 showed that the Honda vehicle with licence plate BTMW 129
was at that time registered to Eric M. Coplin, with an address of 607-40
Falstaff Avenue, Toronto Ontario M6L 2E1. This vehicle was also registeredto Mr. Coplin-Duran on July 5 2014.
The Two Seized Firearms2. The Lorcin L25 semi-automatic handgun and Iver Johnson revolver bothcontained ammunition upon discovery, making them “loaded firearms” or
“firearms with ammunition” within the meaning of the Criminal Code. Theammunition in the firearms was tested and found to meet the Criminal Codedefinition of “ammunition”.
3. Continuity of the seized firearms is not in issue.
4. Both firearms were tested and found to be functional, in proper working order.
5. Both firearms were examined and found to be “prohibited firearms” within themeaning of the Criminal Code.
6. Mr. Coplin-Durran and Mr. Bell do not have an authorization, licence orregistration certificate that would allow either one to lawfully possess, own,handle or transport firearms.
7.
The Iver Johnson FirearmBreak and Enter

8. Sometime between the hours of 8 pm on Tuesday March 10 2009 and 10 amon Wednesday March 11 2009, a break and enter occurred at the residenceof 1 Dow Ave, in the City of Hamilton.

To the Reasons of Kelly J. dated May 10, 2017

- ii -

10. One of the stolen handguns was the Iver Johnson Model –Safety HammerAutomatic that was found in Mr. Coplin-Duran’s vehicle on July 5 2014.
11. A fingerprint located at the scene of the break and enter matched a knownoffender by the name of Matthew Whaley, who was subsequently arrested forthat break and enter, and admitted in a video statement to stealing the IverJohnson firearm.
12. Police are not aware of any connections, links or associations betweenMr. Whaley or Mr. Geddes and either of Mr. Coplin-Duran or Mr. Bell.
DNA

13. On July 9 2014, DC Tibay of the OPP obtained the two seized firearms –theLorcin and the Iver Johnson.
14. DC Tibay printed the guns for fingerprints, but no fingerprints were found.
15. DC Tibay swabbed the guns for DNA and sent the samples to the Centre ofForensic Sciences. The samples were analyzed by biologist James Currie,who produced a report dated November 9 2015.
16. Biologist Currie determined that there was DNA suitable for comparison onthe Iver Johnson firearm. Biologist Currie concluded that the probability thatNathaniel Bell was not the contributor of this DNA was a 1 in 12 quadrillionchance. In plain language, he concluded that Nathaniel Bell’s DNA was onthe Iver Johnson firearm.
17. There was no DNA suitable for comparison on the swab submitted from theLorcin firearm.
Marihuana18. The green leafy substances and flakes seized in the car were all sent toHealth Canada for analysis, and all tested as marihuana.

9. Police investigated and spoke to the home owner Gary Geddes (nowdeceased), who advised that a number of items had been stolen from theresidence, including coins and money, a camera, a diamond ring and threehandguns that he had stored in a safe.

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B E T W E E N:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
- and ERIC COPLIN-DURAN

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

Kelly J.

Released: May 10, 2017

CITATION: R. v. Coplin-Duran, 2017 ONSC 2649
COURT FILE NO.: CR/17/10000/1790000
DATE: 20170510

