CITATION: R. v. E.I., 2017 ONSC 2916
COURT FILE NO.: CR-16-40000331-0000
DATE: 20170512

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
– and –

E.I.
Accused

Jose Andres Hannah-Suarez, for the Crown

Anthony Bugo, for the Accused

HEARD: February 13 - 27, 2017

B.A. ALLEN J.
REASONS FOR DECISION
OVERVIEW

[1]
The accused, E.I., was charged that on June 30, 2015 he sexually assaulted and forciblyconfined the complainant, D.H.-G. After the evidence was in Crown counsel withdrew theforcible confinement charge on the basis the evidence did not support that charge.

[2]
This case involves two people meeting on an online dating site called “Plenty of Fish”.
D.H.-G. was age 19 at the time and. E.I. was age 27. The two were in touch with each otherthrough Plenty of Fish and text messages for about one week before June 30, 2015.

[3]
The original plan for that day was that they meet for dinner in downtown Toronto. Thatplan changed because E.I. told D.H.-G. that he had a family emergency. The plan ultimatelyturned out to be that they meet at his place. E.I. lived in a room in a residential complex nearYork University campus. It was there that D.H.-G. alleges E.I. sexually assaulted her.

[4]
There is no dispute that E.I. had sexual intercourse with D.H.-G.
D.H.-G. consented to the sexual activity.

The issue is whether

[5]
The Crown called D.H.-G. and her cousin, T.H., who D.H.-G. had communicated with byphone and text after the alleged sexual assault.

ONTARIO

[6]
The defence called E.I., a sexual assault nurse from Women’s College Hospital, OfficerDavid Christian who took a statement from D.H.-G., and the two EMS workers who transportedD.H.-G. to the hospital after the alleged sexual assault.

[7]
D.H.-G. and E.I. were both looking for dates on Plenty of Fish. They had put up personalprofiles on the site about themselves. They chose to communicate with each other and spentsome time getting acquainted first through the dating site messaging system and then throughtexting and cell phone calls back and forth. About a day or two before June 30th they madearrangements to meet.

[8]
They shared texts about their goals in life, what they like and dislike in people andpartners and about their outlooks on life. E.I. told D.H.-G. he worked as a computer systemsanalyst. The texts seemed to show they were becoming quite enamoured with each other. E.I.
spoke of the hope of forming a serious relationship with D.H.-G. The texts showed they wereanxious to meet each other.

[9]
By text they planned to meet to have dinner at a restaurant downtown but it was notdefinite as to where. D.H.-G. indicated to E.I. that the last bus to Vaughan, where D.H.-G. lived,was at 11:00 p.m. – 11:30 p.m. E.I. offered at this point that if downtown was inconvenient forher to get home he would hire a taxi for her. E.I. suggested they could “bus it back” to his placeafter dinner to “chill in” and then decide if she would take a bus or taxi home. The plan was tomeet when E.I. got off work at 5:00 p.m. D.H.-G. testified she left her home in the City ofVaughan at 3:00 p.m. to go to Eaton Centre.

[10] D.H.-G.’s evidence is that she had spent the night of June 29 th at her cousin T.H.’s homein North York. She indicated she left and went to her home in Vaughan to shower before sheheaded downtown. D.H.-G. testified that her cousin was the only one who knew about her date.
She said she told her about the date while at her cousin’s house and kept her updated throughoutthe day on June 30th by text.

[11] On June 30th , just hours before the meeting time, E.I. texted that an emergency, laterdescribed as a family emergency, had arisen that he had to attend to. She responded by text
“OMG”, which she testified showed surprise and disappointment. D.H.-G. indicated she wasalready downtown by herself and had been there since 4:00 p.m.

[12] E.I. met D.H.-G. at around 5:00 p.m. at Eaton Centre. He offered that he could take careof the family emergency and then they could meet up later at his place. He also offered theoption of rescheduling the dinner date to another time. She opted to meet him at his place. Heoffered to pay for her taxi and bus fare home from his place. He then left Eaton Centre.

[13] The text messages reveal that D.H.-G. left Eaton Centre at around 6:00 p.m. Shetherefore had been there for about two hours. The plan was for her to contact him when shereached Downsview subway station. It took her 30 - 45 minutes to get to the station. She calledhim when she got to Downsview. E.I. gave her directions to his place and she took the bus fromthe station to his place. It was a 10 - 15 minute bus ride. The bus stop is about three minutesfrom E.I.’s residence.

CIRCMSTANCES LEADING UP TO THE INCIDENT

[14] About four hours had passed between when D.H.-G. arrived at Eaton Centre and whenshe reached E.I.’s place at 8:00 p.m.

[15] E.I. greeted D.H.-G. at the door to his building. E.I.’s home is in a community of housesnear York University campus referred to as The Village. Each house is divided into rooms thatare occupied by tenants. E.I.’s house has three storeys and he lived on the third floor. Kitchenand bathroom facilities are shared among tenants on each floor. The bathroom on E.I.’s floorwas down the hall from his room.

[16] The building is not soundproof. Sounds travel easily from floor to floor. D.H.-G.
testified she could hear the voices of people from a floor below speaking a Chinese dialect.
THE INCIDENT
D.H.-G.’s AccountD.H.-G.’s Evidence In-ChiefThe Sexual Encounters

[17] D.H.-G. testified that when she arrived at the residence she took off her shoes andfollowed E.I. upstairs to the third floor. There were other doors to rooms on that floor that wereclosed. They entered his room and he closed the door. The room had a bed, a desk, a televisionand a closet. She said she sat on the corner of the bed.

[18] It is D.H.-G.’s evidence that the option of going to dinner remained a possibility afterthey arrived at his place. D.H.-G.’s evidence is that E.I. offered her the option of going fordinner somewhere near York University. She plugged in her cell phone because the battery waslow. She said she would look up places to go. She said her original plan was to stay at his placea short while and catch the bus home at 8:15 - 8:20 p.m.

[19] D.H.-G. testified that E.I. next sat on the bed beside her, turned on the television and thensat back against the wall. He asked her to sit further back and she did. They began talking andflipping through Netflix for a movie. He then asked if she had found a place to eat and she saidshe had not. He asked her if she would like to reschedule the dinner so they could hang out at hisplace and get to know each other. She agreed.

[20]

There was no consumption of drugs or alcohol. They both had soft drinks.

[21] D.H.-G. testified at the preliminary inquiry on May 11, 2016 that things started to getphysical five to ten minutes after they arrived at the room.

[22] D.H.-G. said they were sitting up against the wall and he reached over and touched herstomach area. She said she did not like it, that she felt uncomfortable. She said E.I. asked her tostand up and she did so. She did not explain exactly why he asked her to stand. She testifiedthat he then said she had nothing to worry about, that she should not feel insecure oruncomfortable about it.

E.I.’s Residence

[24] D.H.-G. testified that when she was sitting on the bed, her dress was at her upper thighsand he pulled it over her head. He pulled her panties down. She said she tried to stop him frompulling her dress up by holding it down by placing her arms at her sides. Her bra was pulled upover her breasts. He took her dress off and it ended up on the floor. He then pushed her to liedown. She said she was on her back and he got on top of her and inserted his penis into hervagina.

[25] D.H.-G. testified that during the intercourse he was hurting her and she was feelingconfused and scared and she just wanted to go home. She did not think she said anything to him.
She put her hands on his chest to push him off. She testified he did not stop. He asked herwhether she could take it. He then turned her over on her stomach and put his penis into hervagina. She said she believed he ejaculated. She said she did not see him put on a condom butshe thought he had one on because when he got up she saw him take one off.

[26]

D.H.-G. testified she did not consent to having sex with E.I.

[27] D.H.-G. testified that when he was finished, she got up to get dressed because she was ina hurry to leave. She had put her panties on and pulled her bra down when he handed her a toweland told her to take a shower before she left. She testified she told him she would take a showerwhen she got home. But he insisted she take a shower.

[28] D.H.-G. said she walked to the bathroom with her panties on. He showed her how to turnthe taps on and which soap to use. He put the towel on the back of the door and locked it fromthe inside. After the shower, she wrapped the towel around her, carrying her bra and panties, andwent back to his room to get dressed. She put her dress on.

[29] D.H.-G. said E.I. then took her by the arms and placed her on the bed on her back and goton top of her. He lifted her dress up halfway and put his penis into her vagina. She said she sawhim put on a condom but did not know whether he ejaculated.

[30] D.H.-G. testified that during intercourse E.I. said something that startled her. She said heasked her if he gave her a certain amount of money would she make an arrangement with him tohave sex with him again. She said she did not answer him. He then told her if she did notanswer the question he would not stop the intercourse he was forcing on her. D.H.-G. testifiedshe did not want anything from him and that he was hurting her and she started crying.

[31]

She said she again did not consent to having sex with E.I. this second time.

[32] D.H.-G. said when he was finished he got up. She grabbed her things. She pulled downher dress, put on her panties and packed her bag. She said he then approached her and put
$50.00 on the bed. He told her to use it to take a taxi to the bus stop to catch the bus to Vaughan.
D.H.-G. said she responded that she did not need a taxi. She then checked to see when her bus

[23] D.H.-G. said she recalled they were watching the movie and he started moving towardher on the bed. She said she did not respond to this and they kept talking for a while. She saidE.I. then got up and walked to the desk beside the television and walked back to the bed. He hadon a tank top and eventually took off his shorts and she believes he took off his underwear.

[33] They both went downstairs. D.H.-G. put on her shoes and he asked her when she wasgoing to come back. She does not recall whether she answered him. She then left to walktowards the campus. She said she had the money in her bag. D.H.-G. said she was not thinkingabout the money when she left because she was not planning to use it. She said she had notexchanged money for sex.

[34] D.H.-G. texted her cousin, T.H., from E.I.’s room between 10:05 and 10:06 and wrote:
“T.H., he raped me then offered me money to pay for sex. While I was crying he asked me howmuch and threw $50.00 at me.” In answer to her cousin’s order for her to pick up the phone andto her questions, “Who? Where are you?” – at 10:06 p.m. D.H.-G. responded, “He’s still here. I
can’t pick up.”

[35] D.H.-G. testified she spoke by phone to T.H. and her aunt after she left the building. Heraunt advised her to call 911. She walked to a building on campus and called 911.
Post-Incident Events

[36] D.H.-G. spoke to the 911 dispatcher for 16 minutes. The recording of her conversationwith the dispatcher was played in open court. The Crown requested the 911 call be acceptedonly for the purpose of establishing D.H.-G.’s demeanor.

[37] D.H.-G. can be heard crying uncontrollably. Many of her words are indecipherable. Shetold the dispatcher her location and that she had been raped. She gave her name and age. Shetold the dispatcher the name of the person who raped her and where he lived.

[38] Two EMS paramedics arrived at 10:42 p.m. to assist D.H.-G. She was seen by a sexualassault nurse from Women’s College Hospital. D.H.-G. testified that her arms and vagina weresore. She said there were no bruises on her body.

[39] On July 1, 2015, D.H.-G. went to the police station to report the sexual assault. She gavethe police the $50.00 and $5.00 and the clothes she had worn at E.I.’s place. She testified inchief that she did not tell the police about the assault.
Cross-Examination of D.H.G.

[40] D.H.-G.’s police statement was taken on July 1, 2015 and the preliminary inquiryoccurred on May 11, 2016, just under one year after the incident. The defence’s crossexamination on inconsistencies between her prior statements and between and her testimony inchief and her prior statements cut to the heart of the credibility and reliability of her allegation ofsexual assault.
Details in Police Statement Not Given at Trial

[41] The defence confronted D.H.-G. with the evidence she gave in-chief that she did not tellthe police anything. She responded that she did not really recall whether she told the police

would arrive. She testified he then handed her $5.00 for bus fare. She said E.I. put the $50.00
and the $5.00 into her bag.

[42] The defence for instance pointed to the following information in the officer’s notes: theaccused’s name; that he is male, black; his address; that she met him on Plenty of Fish; that heworks at BMO; their first date was June 30th ; they met at a café at Eaton Centre; that he invitedher back to his place later; that she was on her phone on the edge of his bed; that he offered her ablanket to cover herself; that he started moving close to her; that he pulled her towards him; thathe told her to relax; that she was wearing a little orange/red dress; that he put his arm around her;that he was trying to find something to watch on the television; that he started to get morephysical; and that before he took off her dress they were just talking.

[43] Defence counsel also posed questions to D.H.-G. on what she told the police about E.I.’sbehaviour in relation to her taking a shower. What she told the police led to a forcibleconfinement charge being laid. According to her police statement, she told the police that E.I.
took her to the bathroom, showed her the soap and how to use the taps and locked the door andstood watching her take the shower.

[44] In-chief at trial, confirmed on cross-examination, she testified that E.I. led her to thebathroom, turned on the pipe for her, left the towel on the back of the door, stood in thebathroom momentarily and left the bathroom locking the door from inside. The forcibleconfinement charge was withdrawn based on that evidence.

[45] After the defence enumerated the details of what she said to the police, D.H.-G. said shedid not recall telling the police those things. Defence counsel challenged her pointing out thatshe gave the police the $50.00 and $5.00 so she must recall telling them something about themoney. She denied giving the police details about the money.

[46] The defence put to D.H.-G., and she agreed, that she did not give the police importantcontextual information. She did not tell the police that E.I. had originally invited her out to arestaurant for dinner. She did not mention the change of plans, that he tried to cancel the dateand offered her the option of rescheduling the date to another day. She did not relay to the policethe evidence that she was still looking to go to a restaurant near E.I.’s place. Nor did she tell thepolice he offered her the option of hanging out at his place and that she ultimately agreed to thatarrangement.
Period of Time in E.I.’s Room

[47] The defence also confronted D.H.-G. on her evidence about what occurred between herand E.I. before things got physical. Her evidence in-chief was that things got physical about fiveto ten minutes after they got to the room. At trial D.H.-G. stated that she did not know how longthey spoke before E.I. forced sexual intercourse.

[48] The defence put to her topics of her conversation with E.I.: about where she was in herlife regarding jobs and education; about her mother; and about an incident on York Universitycampus of her being stalked and roughed up. D.H.-G. did not deny talking about those things.
She said she did not remember. She confirmed that she was stalked and agreed she must have

anything. She then said she did tell them some things but not the details. The defence put to herthat on July 1st she gave a detailed statement to Officer David Christian about many things.

[49] The defence summarized the timing of the various occurrences based on evidence sheprovided at the preliminary inquiry: the first sexual assault lasting about five minutes; theshower, about five minutes; the second sexual assault happening about five to ten minutes afterthe first assault; the second assault lasting five to ten minutes. D.H.-G. agreed she gave thoseanswers at the preliminary inquiry and that the answers were true.

[50] The defence also put to D.H.-G. that taking into account the five to ten minutes beforethings got physical and the timing of the two assaults and the shower, on those times everythingwould have happened by about 9:00 p.m. D.H.-G. responded that she did not know.

[51] The defence put to her that by the times on the text messages to her cousin she wouldhave left his residence at around 10:06 p.m. to 10:07 p.m. And the 911 recording indicates shecalled at 10:22 p.m. D.H.-G. had no explanation. She just said, “I don’t know.”

[52] To the suggestion by the defence that there is one hour of lost time, she at first gave noanswer. Then with persistence in pointing out the timing discrepancy, D.H.-G. conceded thatover an hour would have passed before any sexual activity started, not five to ten minutes.
Initial Physical Activity

[53] The defence asked D.H.-G. why in the beginning when he touched her stomach and shefelt uncomfortable given her original plan to leave quickly, she did not leave at that point. Thedefence pointed out that E.I. asked her to stand up before he got more physical and instead ofleaving, she sat back down. D.H.-G. did not have an answer for that query.

[54] The defence asked whether E.I. kissed her on her neck, put his arm around her and shemoved toward him, and whether they were talking before things got more physical, before hetook her dress off. She responded, “No”. The defence then directed her to her police statementwhere she told the police that is what occurred. D.H.-G responded that she said those things tothe police and that she was telling the truth. She says she now recalls him putting his arm aroundher but does not recall him kissing her or her moving toward him. To the suggestion that therewas consensual kissing, she responded she did not recall kissing him. She rejected the suggestionthat consensual kissing and hugging led to consensual, not forced, sex with E.I.

[55] Defence counsel asked D.H.-G. about her evidence that she did not see E.I. put on acondom. He pointed to her police statement where she said she saw him get up and put on acondom. She also said she saw him wearing a muscle shirt and a condom. D.H.-G. confirmedshe said those things and that it is true. She gave no explanation for the divergence in herevidence.
The Sequence of the Assaults and the Shower

[56] The defence asked her whether on the version of the sexual assaults she gave in-chief,E.I. made her take another shower. D.H.-G. responded, “No”. Defence counsel then questionedher about other evidence she gave to the police. He pointed to her statement that after the first

told that to E.I. D.H.-G. agreed with the defence’s suggestion that covering all those topics in aconversation would take more than five to ten minutes.

[57] Defence counsel referred to the officer’s notes and posed to D.H.-G. that she told thepolice he assaulted her two times then made her take a shower after the second assault. She didnot deny saying this. She said she did not recall the details of what she told the police.
Variations in the Evidence about the Money

[58] Defence counsel raised an inconsistency in D.H.-G.’s evidence about the offer of moneyby E.I. On cross-examination, she gave another reason that E.I. offered her money. In additionto her earlier evidence that the offer of money was for a future arrangement to have sex, shetestified that when she said the sex was hurting her E.I. offered her money during the sexualassault to allow him to continue having sex with her. D.H.-G. said she did not recall duringwhich assault he said this.

[59] The defence posed to her the serious implications of this evidence – an offer of moneyduring a sexual assault – as to how she could forget to mention this kind of thing whenanswering the Crown’s questions. D.H.-G. admitted that she found it very degrading that he hadjust undressed her and was having sex with her and then offered her money.

[60] The defence questioned D.H.-G. on her varying evidence about the $50.00 and $5.00.
He reminded her of her evidence that E.I. gave her the money and she did not want it. Sheclarified that he first placed it on the bed and then he put it in her purse.

[61] Defence counsel then referred her to her preliminary inquiry evidence where she said shetook the money and put it in her bag. D.H.-G. stated that she did not recall saying that. He putto her that she told two opposing stories under oath on two different occasions – that she put themoney in her bag and that E.I. put the money in her bag. D.H.-G. did not account for thisdiscrepancy.

[62] The defence raised other questions about the money, this time on the variations in D.H.G.’s evidence about the purpose for the money.

[63] D.H.-G. testified, and confirmed under cross-examination, that E.I. gave her the moneyonly for a taxi home.

[64] The defence put to D.H.-G. that she told her cousin, T.H., by text that E.I. raped her,offered to pay her for sex and threw the money at her. Defence counsel challenged her that shetold the 911 dispatcher that after it happened he handed her money and asked her how much heshould pay the next time she sees him. D.H.-G. agreed she wrote that to T.H. and that the moneyshe was referring to was the $50.00 he gave her for a taxi. She agreed she said those words tothe dispatcher.

[65] D.H.-G. went on to deny the defence’s suggestion that she was trying to convey theimpression that the money was payment for the sexual assault. She said that was not herintention and that she was very emotional when she said that. D.H.-G. said she was just focusing

sexual assault she tried to get up; that he pushed her down; then forced sex on her again; and thatafter the second assault he made her take a shower.

on getting help. She denied the suggestion that she fixated on the money in her story to enhanceher allegation of rape.

[66] Defence counsel reminded D.H.-G. that in-chief she said after the assaults she stopped tocheck the times for buses. He asked her why if she had just been assaulted and was in a hurry toleave she would take the time to check times for buses on her phone when she already knew theschedule. D.H.-G.’s response was that sometimes the buses are not on time and she had tocheck. Defence counsel suggested she delayed to check her phone because she knew she wasnot in danger. Her response was she did not know why she thought of checking on the buses atthat time.
Cousin T.H.’s Evidence

[67] T.H. was the Crown’s only other witness. She testified briefly but she gave someevidence that in important ways contradicted D.H.-G.’s evidence.

[68] T.H. acknowledged the exchange of texts and phone calls between herself and D.H.-G.
just after 7:00 p.m. on the evening of June 30th . She testified that her cousin sounded very upsetand emotional over the texts and phone in telling her she was raped and that her date tried to payher for sex and threw money at her.

[69] However, contrary to D.H.-G., T.H. said D.H.-G. did not stay at her home overnight onJune 29th . T.H. said she had not seen D.H.-G. for some time before June 30th . T.H. alsocontradicted D.H.-G.’s contention that D.H.-G. kept her up to date throughout the day on June30th about her date plans with E.I. In fact, when T.H. gave her statement to the police she toldthem she knew about the date but had actually forgotten about it.
DISPOSITION

[70]

I arrived at a verdict without the need to consider the defence’s evidence.

[71] The basic principles that underlie the assessment of guilt are common ground. TheCrown’s obligation is to prove E.I.’s guilt beyond a reasonable. This means proving eachelement of the offences charged beyond a reasonable doubt. What follows is that the accused isinnocent until proven guilty and is not required to call evidence. The accused does not have toprove his innocence. The Crown’s responsibility remains the same whether the defence callsevidence or not.

[72] E.I. does not dispute that he and D.H.-G. had sexual intercourse on the evening of June30th . The only issue is whether D.H.-G. consented or not. The available defence is consent.
D.H.-G. contends she did not consent to the sexual contact between her and E.I. Where adefence is raised the Crown has the added task of disproving the defence beyond a reasonabledoubt. The Crown’s success in disproving consent in this case rests mainly in establishing thecredibility and reliability of D.H.-G.’s evidence.

Delay in Leaving After the Assaults

[74] The question is whether the Crown’s evidence is sufficient to permit a finding ofguilt, that is, whether the Crown’s case is capable of supporting a verdict of guilt beyond areasonable doubt. The absence of evidence on an essential element or the absence of sufficientevidence to disprove a defence requires an acquittal.

[75] As set out above, D.H.-G.’s evidence at trial lacked credibility and reliability in criticalareas, for instance: her evidence about the length of time in E.I.’s room; her failure to tell thepolice about the original plan for dinner at a restaurant and the option E.I. offered to reschedulethe date; the absence in her testimony in-chief about what occurred between them before thingsgot physical; contradictions in her evidence about who put the money in her purse and about thepurpose for the money; the contradictions between what she told the police and testified to attrial about the timing of the shower and the sexual assaults; and her evidence that after thealleged assault she delayed to check the bus times rather than just rushing out to get away fromE.I.

[76] The only witness called to support her evidence, her cousin T.H., even contradicted herevidence.

[77] D.H.-G.’s evidence was so replete with contradictions and inconsistencies it would bedangerous to rely on her testimony to convict E.I. I further considered whether there wasanything in the defence’s evidence that strengthened the Crown’s case and I found there was not.
The Crown did not succeed in disproving beyond a reasonable doubt that D.H.-G. consented tothe physical contact and sexual intercourse with E.I. In the result, I must return a verdict of notguilty on the charge sexual assault.
VERDICT

[78] For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied the Crown has failed to prove E.I.’s guilt beyonda reasonable doubt on count 1 on the indictment.

[79] I therefore find E.I. not guilty on count 1 on the indictment and an acquittal will beentered accordingly.

_________________________________
B.A. ALLEN J.
Released: May 12, 2017

[73] The defence called the evidence of E.I. However, in considering whether the Crown hasmet its burden I conclude that I need not consider E.I.’s evidence nor the evidence of the otherdefence witnesses in arriving at a verdict

CITATION: R. v. E.I., 2017 ONSC 2916
COURT FILE NO.: CR-16-40000331-0000
DATE: 20170512

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
– and –

E.I.
Accused

REASONS FOR DECISION

B.A. ALLEN J.

Released: May 12, 2017

