SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE – ONTARIO

RE:

CHRISTA LYNN RAWSTHORNE, PETER RAWSTHORNE,BRAEDEN RAWSTHORNE, an infant by his Litigation Guardian,CHRISTA LYNN RAWSTHORNE, LINDA ANN WIEBE,RONALD PETER WIEBE and JASON WIEBE, PlaintiffsAND:
JOHN D. MAROTTA, RICHARD PATRICK HARPER, andCHEDOKE-MCMASTER HOSPITAL also known asHAMILTON HEALTH SCIENCES CORPORATION, Defendants

BEFORE:

Justice Edward P. Belobaba

COUNSEL: Valerie Wise and Julia Lauwers for the Defendant Dr. Richard HarperPatrick J. Hawkins and John McIntyre for the Defendant HospitalBrian Moher and Monica Zamfir for the PlaintiffsHEARD:

April 6, 2017
SUMMARY JUDGMENT MOTIONS – LIMITATIONS

[1]
This is a dental malpractice action. There are two motions for summary judgmentbefore me, both advancing a limitations defence. One is brought by the defendant dentalsurgeon, Patrick Harper, and the other by the defendant Hospital. Dr. Harper says theplaintiffs’ action is time-barred by the one-year limitation period in s. 89(1) of the Health

CITATION: Rawsthorne v. Marotta et al, 2017 ONSC 2182
COURT FILE NO.: 10-CV-219323CM
DATE: 20170510

- Page 2 -

[2]
The underlying malpractice action arises from the medical care and treatment thatwas provided to eighteen year-old Christa Rawsthorne (“Christa”) by Dr. Harper at theHospital in October 1992. The action, brought by Christa and her family-members, wascommenced nine years later in October 2001. Discoveries took place in 2002 but theaction was then side-lined for many years to accommodate related litigation.

[3]
Dr. Harper says Christa had enough information to bring her action long before2001 when the action was commenced and the action is now time-barred. The Hospital,in turn, focuses on the fact that Christa was discharged from the Hospital on October 28,1992, the day after her dental surgery. The applicable limitations period required that shesue the Hospital within two years of her discharge - that is by October 28, 1994. The2001 lawsuit, says the Hospital, is seven years too late.

[4]
For the reasons set out below, I agree that the plaintiffs’ action is time -barred asagainst the Hospital but not as against Dr. Harper. The action against the Hospital isdismissed. The action against Dr. Harper shall continue on to trial.
Background

[5]
The basic chronology is not in dispute. In 1989 when she was 15 years old, Christabegan to experience headaches, earaches and jaw pain in the temporomandibular joint
(“TMJ”) area of her jaw. She attributes this to an incident in gym class when she fell hardand hit her chin on the hardwood floor. After seeing a number of doctors and dentists shewas referred to Dr. Harper in late 1991.

[6]
Dr. Harper performed left-sided TMJ surgery on March 10, 1992. This surgery didnot relieve Christa’s pain. He performed a second surgery on Christa on October 27,1992. During this surgery, Dr. Harper inserted a silastic implant (“the Implant”) into herleft TMJ. However, Christa’s pain continued. On February 8, 1993, Christa visited Dr.Harper for the last time and soon thereafter she began seeing Dr. Psutka.

[7]
Dr. Psutka performed three surgeries on Christa’s TMJ. In January 1994, heremoved the Implant and told Christa that the Implant had a perforation in it “the size of a

1

2

Regulated Health Professions Act, 1991, S.O. 1991, c. 18, Schedule 2, Health Professions Procedural Code.
Public Hospitals Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.40.

Professions Procedural Code 1 and the Hospital relies on the two-year limitation period ins. 31 of the Public Hospitals Act.2

- Page 3 -

[8]
Over the next three years, Dr. Psutka’s medical notes indicate that Christa wasgenerally “doing well” and “feeling great.” In January 2001, however, Christa’s infantson accidently hit her in her jaw and she collapsed in pain. Christa says it was in andaround this time that she began to investigate whether the Implant that had been removedin 1994 was the cause of her facial pain and related health problems.

[9]
Christa retained legal counsel experienced in alloplastic TMJ litigation and soonlearned that the Implants were not only mechanically defective but biologicallyhazardous. There was considerable scientific evidence that not only did the Implantsperforate and disintegrate requiring immediate removal, the disintegration processreleased granular material into surrounding soft tissue that caused “progressive bonedegenerative changes” and “giant cell foreign body responses.”

[10] The plaintiffs (Christa and family members) issued their statement of claim onOctober 24, 2001. As against Dr. Harper, the pleading alleges, amongst other things,negligence in the installation of the mechanically defective Implant and a failure to warnabout the long-term, post-removal biological hazard. The claim against the Hospital issimilarly focused, in large part, on its negligence in allowing the defective Implant to beused in TMJ procedures and his failure to warn about the long-term biological hazard.

[11]

I will deal first with Dr. Harper’s motion and then the Hospital’s.

The claim against Dr. Harper

[12] Section 89(1) of the Health Professions Procedural Code 3 provided at the time inquestion as follows:
No person who is or was a member is liable to any action arising out ofnegligence or malpractice in respect of professional services requested ofor rendered by the person unless the action is commenced within oneyear after the date when the person commencing the action knew orought to have known the fact or facts upon which the negligence ormalpractice is alleged.

3

Supra, note 1.

quarter.” In 1995, Dr. Psutka removed more debris from the perforated implant and useda bone graft from Christa’s rib to reconstruct part of her left TMJ. In 1997, he performedrevision surgery to remove more Implant debris as well as a bone spur which had grownon the graft.

- Page 4 -

[14] Christa must prove that she did not know and could not have known the materialfacts giving rise to the action before October 24, 2000, that is, one year before thecommencement of her October 24, 2001 action. Christa must show, in other words, thatshe did not know and could not have known that her injury, loss or damage was causedby an act or omission of Dr. Harper until after October 24, 2000. Christa says it was theincident with her infant son (hitting her jaw) in January 2001 that prompted her to doresearch on the Implant and retain legal counsel.

[15] The record before me consists only of affidavits from the plaintiffs, in particularChrista and her mother, and their cross-examinations. There are no affidavits from Dr.Harper or the Hospital, and no affidavits from any other medical professionals such asDr. Psutka. Counsel for Christa says the best (and only) evidence , all uncontroverted, isthat of the plaintiffs.

[16] I can find comfortably on the evidence that Christa knew or ought to have knownin 1994 and 1995, when Dr. Psutka performed the Implant and debris removal surgeries,that the Implant was defective. At least mechanically defective. According to Christa, sheknew that the Implant had to come out because it was perforated and could do damage toher joint if it was not removed; and that the debris also had to be cle ared. Christaconcluded that she had been implanted with a “bad joint” - a “lemon” - that needed to beremoved. As she explained on cross-examination:
Q. When Dr. Psutka removed the implant, then, did you understand orthink that something had gone wrong with the implant surgery Dr.Harper did?
A. Sorry. Can you repeat that?
Q. Sure. When Dr. Psutka took out the implant, did you think, at thatpoint in time, that something must have gone wrong with Dr. Harper’simplant surgery?
A. I just felt we got a lemon, it is what it is, let’s get it fixed

[17] Christa’s evidence is that none of the doctors, beginning with Dr. Harper, ever toldher or said anything to her about the Implant being hazardous. “Dr. Psutka only told methat the implant had to come out because it was perforated…[No one] ever advised methat Silastic implants had been the subject of FDA or Health Canada recall notices as wellas other dental professional recalls.”

[13] I agree with Dr. Harper that the failure to warn claims are claims in negligence andtherefore the one-year limitation period applies throughout.

- Page 5 -

Christa’s mother said the same thing:
[A]t the time of [Christa’s] explantation surgery by Dr. Psutka in 1994,Dr. Psutka never told us that implant particles or remnants of the implantleft in [her] jaw were hazardous. At the time, he told us that all of theimplant had been removed …I was never told about any risks associatedwith Silastic implants prior to my daughter’s surgery or since by Dr.Harper … or Dr. Psutka.

[19] The mother’s evidence is corroborated by what she said in her letter to MountSinai Hospital in March 1995 – that “Christa’s [explant] surgery in January of 1994 byDr. Psutka was extremely successful.”

[20] In his factum, Dr. Harper drew the court’s attention to possible pockets of evasionor prevarication in Christa’s cross-examination evidence. I recognize that credibilityissues may materialize as this action proceeds. Nonetheless, and on the whole, Christa’sevidence at its core remains largely uncontroverted. I cannot find on this evidence thatChrista knew or ought to have known about the highly toxic biological hazards relating tothe Implant before she began researching the issue and retained legal counsel in or afterJanuary 2001. She certainly knew about the so-called mechanical defects – the propensityfor disintegration and the need to remove the resulting debris – but she did not know andcould not have known until after January, 2001 that the Implant was biologicallyhazardous.

[21] The applicable law is not in dispute. The case law is clear that discovery does notdepend upon awareness of the totality of the defendant’s wrongdoing. Neither the exac textent nor the type of loss need be known for the cause of action to accrue. Once theplaintiff knows that “some damage has occurred and has identified the tortfeasor thecause of action has accrued.”4

[22] Dr. Harper says it is enough that Christa knew that some damage had occurred,namely the injury or loss was caused by the mechanical defect. She did not have to knowthat the Implant caused additional injury or loss because of the biological hazard. But asthe Supreme Court noted in Peixeiro,5 the cause of action accrues when the plaintiffknows that some damage has occurred and she has identified the tortfeasor who causedthis damage. Here, Christa could not identify the tortfeasor responsible for the post-

4

Peixeiro v. Haberman, {1997] 3 S.C.R. 549, at para 18.

5

Ibid.

[18]

- Page 6 -

[23] As the Court of Appeal noted in Aguonie v. Galion Solid Waste: “[t]he discoveryof a tortfeasor involves more than the identity of one who may be liable. It involves thediscovery of his or her acts or omissions which constitute liability.” 6 And again, and morerecently, in Marr Foster: “[t]he issue is whether the plaintiff knew or ought reasonably tohave known injury loss or damage had occurred … that was caused by or contributed toby an act or omission of the defendant.”7 The same point was made in the legal literatureby a commentator specifically discussing Peixeiro in the context of medical malpracticeactions:
Each element of the cause of action must be known to the plaintiff orwith reasonable diligence known to her. Fault causation and damage areeach elements of the cause of action. ...In order to bring the action, theact of negligence alleged, attached to a specific defendant must be withinthe knowledge of the plaintiff.8

[24] Christa did not and could not connect the January, 2001 flare-up of pain to Dr.Harper until she discovered that the Implant was more than just mechanically defective .
She did not identify Dr. Harper as the tortfeasor responsible for the biological harm untilafter January 2001 when she began her research and retained legal counsel. Therefore theaction commenced in October, 2001 is not time-barred.

[25] Dr. Harper argues that if this narrative is accepted, then Christa knew or shouldhave known about the so-called biological hazard by 1997 or 1998. He points to the factthat Christa and her mother had joined a TMJ/Implant support group in their area around1993 and that she must have been aware of an Implant lawsuit that was filed in 1993 byMs. Hunse, one of the members of this support group. Dr. Harper also points to the factthat by 1998 Christa, by her own admission, had copies of articles from the supportgroup in her possession, The titles of the articles included:
 The TMJ Implant Disaster

6

Aguonie v. Galion Solid Waste Material Inc., [1998] O.J. No. 459 (C.A.) at para. 24.

7

Presidential MSH Corporation v. Marr Foster & Co. LLP, 2017 ONCA 325, at para. 27.

8

Legate, “Limitation Periods in Medical Negligence Actions Post-Peixeiro” (1998) 20 Adv. Q. 326 at 334 and 341.

removal biological harm until she began to research the Implant in and after January 2001
following the incident with her infant son.

- Page 7  They were supposed to relieve chronic head and neck pain, but the jaw implantsthat thousands of people received during the ‘80s weren’t sufficiently tested. Now,they’re a medical time bomb.

[26] Dr. Harper says it is hard to believe that Christa had not at least read the titles ofthe articles. On cross-examination, Christa admitted that she could have read a fewsentences such as an article headline or byline. Dr. Harper asks that I draw the inferencefrom the evidence about the Hunse lawsuit and the titles of these articles that Christaknew or should have known by 1997 or 1998 (and well before October, 2000) that theImplant was not only mechanically defective but also biologically hazardous.

[27] I am not prepared to draw such an inference. I would not be comfortable in doingso on the record before me. Nor am I confident that it would be fair or just to do so.9
Whether and to what extent Christa knew about the Hunse lawsuit and that the lawsuitwas alleging biological hazards, and whether and to what extent Christa read any of theaforementioned articles and actually realized from the contents of these articles that theImplant was biologically hazardous is best resolved at trial.

[28] Dr. Harper’s limitation defence remains a genuine issue for trial. His motion forsummary judgment is dismissed.
The claim against the Hospital

[29] The Hospital says the action is statute-barred by virtue of the two-year limitationperiod in s. 31 of the Public Hospitals Act10 which was in effect at the time in question.
Section 31 provides that:
Any action against a hospital or any nurse or person employed therein fordamages for injury caused by negligence in the admission, care,treatment or discharge of a patient shall be brought within two years afterthe patient is discharged from or ceases to receive treatment at thehospital and not afterwards.

[30] The case law is clear that the s. 31 limitation period is not subject to the principleof discoverability. The provision is mandatory in its wording and it runs from the day the

9

Hryniak v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7, at paras. 50, 57 and 59.

10

Ibid.

 Implants in Jaw Joint Fail, Leaving Patients in Pain and Disfigured

- Page 8 -

patient ceases to receive treatment at the hospital or from the patient’s discharge from theHospital.11
As the Court of Appeal noted in Von Cramm:
It may seem harsh to apply limitation provisions under the PublicHospitals Act in a situation such as this where the plaintiff could not haveknown or reasonably have been expected to know of the negligence ofthe hospital until long after the limitation period had expired; but section

[31] is quite clear and we must give effect to it. The wording is preciseand there is no valid ground for avoiding it … Any amelioration of thesituation must be provided by the Legislature and not by the Court.12

[32] The plaintiffs issued their statement of claim on October 24, 2001. The allegationsof negligence referring to the Hospital relate to the treatment provided to Christa onOctober 27, 1992. The “failure to warn” allegations constitute a form of negligence andare made with respect to treatment received by Christa at the Hospital. As such, theseallegations fall within the meaning of “negligence in the admission, care, treatment anddischarge of a patient” under s. 31 of the Public Hospitals Act.

[33] Christa was discharged from the Hospital on October 28, 1992 and did not reattend at the Hospital for any treatment after this date. Accordingly, the limitation periodexpired on October 28, 1994, almost seven years before this action was commenced.

[34] I agree with the Hospital that this is an appropriate case for summary judgment.
There is no genuine issue for trial and the action against it should be dismissed.
Disposition

[35] Dr. Harper’s motion for summary judgment is dismissed. The limitations issueremains a genuine issue for trial. The Hospital’s motion for summary judgment is grantedand the action as against the Hospital is dismissed.

11

Von Cramm v. Riverside Hospital of Ottawa, [1986] O.J. No. 999 (C.A.), Hay v. Canadian Red Cross Society,

[2004] O.J. No. 2887 (Sup. Ct.), Purtell v. Royal Ottawa Hospital, [2005] O.J. No. 2965 (Sup. Ct.), aff’d 2007
ONCA 367, leave to appeal refused [2007] S.C.C.A. No. 362. Also see Endean v. St. Joseph’s General Hospital,2017 ONSC 118, a related litigation, (unreported) at para. 34
12

Von Cramm, supra, note 3, at para. 12.

[31]

[36] Both the plaintiffs and the Hospital are entitled to their costs on a partial indemnitybasis. The parties filed costs submissions seeking the following: Dr. Harper $140,000
(motion plus action), the Hospital $97,000 (motion plus action) and the plaintiffs $36,000
(motion only). In my view, it is fair and reasonable in all the circumstances of thislitigation to award $36,000 all-inclusive to the plaintiffs, payable forthwith by Dr.Harper; and $70,000 all-inclusive to the Hospital, payable in any event of the cause bythe plaintiffs but only after the Harper litigation has been fully resolved.

Belobaba J.
Date: May 10, 2017

- Page 9 -

