SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO
RE:

MARIA REGO, Plaintiffv.
WALMART CANADA CORP, Defendant

BEFORE:

EMERY J.

COUNSEL: Barjinder Kalsi and Thomas Long, for the PlaintiffStephen G. Ross and Andrew Yolles, for the DefendantHEARD:

In Writing

D E C I S I O N O N T H E D E F E N D A N T ’ S MO T I O N F O R L E AV E
T O AP P E A L

[1]

The defendant Walmart Canada Corp. brings this motion for leave to

appeal the order of the Honourable Justice Barnes dated January 11, 2017 inwhich the defendant’s motion for summary judgment to dismiss this action wasdismissed. In his endorsement, Justice Barnes concluded that the evidentiaryrecord before the court revealed that there is a genuine issue requiring a trial.

CITATION: Rego v. Walmart, 2017 ONSC 2599
COURT FILE NO.: CV-14-1650-00
DATE: 20170526

[2]

Justice Barnes also concluded that, given the nature of the litigation, the

would simply duplicate a trial. He stated that such a process will not be moretimely or less expensive. He therefore ordered that the matter proceed to trialwith all other matters reserved to the trial judge.

[3]

Walmart submits that there are decisions of this court that conflict with

the order made by Justice Barnes, or there is good reason to doubt itscorrectness. Walmart also submits that the issues in the proposed appeal arematters of such importance that leave should be granted.
Background Facts and Evidence

[4]

There is no dispute in this action that the plaintiff, Maria Rego, fell while

walking in a Walmart store on October 21, 2013. The cause of her fall is thecentral issue in the action. The cause of her fall was therefore the central issuefor the motion for summary judgment heard by Justice Barnes.

[5]

Ms. Rego alleges in the statement of claim that she fell because she

slipped on liquid present on the floor of the store. As a result of the fall, shesuffered injuries for which she claims damages.

use of the additional powers under Rule 20.04(2.1) would result in a process that

[6]

Examinations for discovery have been completed in this action. On

defendant and filed it with the court to set the case down for trial.

[7]

A pre-trial conference is scheduled for 10:00 a.m. on June 8, 2017.

Reasons Given for the Order Made

[8]

Justice Barnes concluded that Walmart’s motion for summary judgment

to dismiss the action should be dismissed.

[9]

Justice Barnes addressed two allegations relating to liability on the

motion for summary judgment based on claims made by Ms. Rego:
1. That she fell as a result of liquid on the floor of the Walmart store,causing her to fall and sustain injuries;2. That Walmart did not have a reasonable system of inspection andmaintenance in place at the time of the incident.

[10]

Walmart took the position on the motion that there was no evidence of

liquid on the floor at the time of Ms. Rego’s fall. Walmart also advanced anargument that Ms. Rego fell because she was wearing high heels at the time.

December 14, 2015, the lawyers for Ms. Rego served a trial record on the

[11]

Walmart also states that even if there was liquid on the floor, it

incident. In either respect, Walmart is not liable.

[12]

Justice Barnes focused on the legal test for liability under the Occupier’s

[13]

Justice

Barnes

also

relied

upon

the

direction

given

by

Justice

Karakatsanis of the Supreme Court of Canada to judges hearing motions forsummary judgment in Hryniak v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7. Justice Barnesspecifically noted the direction of how this process should unfold in the followingterms:
(1) The court should examine the existing record to determine if there is agenuine issue requiring a trial;
(2) If the court determines that there is a genuine issue requiring a trial,the court should determine whether it is appropriate to use the

maintained a reasonable system of inspection and maintenance at the time of the

additional powers under Rule 20.04(2.1), unless it is in the interest of

[14]

On the evidentiary record before the court at the time Walmart’s motion

for summary judgment was heard, Justice Barnes reviewed the evidence of allWalmart employees who tended to Ms. Rego that they did not see any liquid ordebris on the floor. Further, the CCTV camera footage that captured the fallshows that there was no liquid or debris where Ms. Rego fell.

[15]

Walmart did not provide any evidence from Sherry Smith. Ms. Smith is

also the Walmart employee who completed the Customer Incident Report.
Because the CCTV camera footage does not show Sherry Smith wiping liquid offthe floor, she seeks to examine the CCTV camera operator. Walmart did notprovide any evidence from the CCTV operator on the motion.

[16]

Justice Barnes recognized that, even if he was satisfied on the balance of

probabilities that there was liquid on the floor where Ms. Rego fell, Walmartwould not be liable if it could demonstrate that it had discharged its statutory dutyunder the Occupier’s Liability Act. Walmart would also escape liability if it couldprove it had met the required standard of care in all of the circumstances toensure that those premises were reasonably safe for all persons who entered thestore.

justice for these powers to be exercised only at trial.

[17]

Walmart made submissions that it had a reasonable system of inspection

of Rupinder Kaur, a manager at the Walmart store, to testify that Walmartemployees are required to clean up spills and to record any spills that theycleaned up on the back on the Sweep Log for each day. The back page of theSweep Log for October 21, 2013 does not indicate any spills at the locationwhere Ms. Rego fell.

[18]

Ms. Rego herself said that she did not see any liquid or debris when she

fell. However, at her examination for discovery, Ms. Rego later testified that sheobserved a Walmart employee later identified as Sherry Smith cleaning up liquidfrom the area where the fall had occurred.

[19]

Ms. Rego also put in issue whether the existing procedures in place at

Walmart that day were adequate in all of the circumstances, including:
1. The presence of bad weather on the day of the incident;2. Even if Walmart’s system of inspection and maintenance for thestore was adequate, there was no evidence it was implementedproperly; and

and maintenance in place at all material times. Walmart relied upon the evidence

3. Walmart provided no evidence from any of its employees having

Bibi Ishmail.

[20]

On the basis of those issues, Justice Barnes concluded on the

evidentiary record before him that:
1. A fuller evidentiary record is required to explore Ms. Rego’sargument about the impact of inclement weather. Justice Barnesstated that it was unclear to him from the record what the weatherconditions were on that day. Although he did not find this issue to bedeterminative for the purpose of the motion, he stated that it wasrelevant to whether the Walmart procedures were actually followedby the employees tasked with doing the actual cleaning;2. Ms. Kaur’s evidence did not address the issues of whether theemployees, who had the responsibility to look for spills and to cleanup those spills under the procedure, actually did so; and3. Evidence

from witnesses

who were actually

implementing the

procedure on the day of the incident was required to resolve theissue of whether Walmart’s system of inspection and maintenancewas followed on the date of loss.

responsibility to implement the system that day, including employee

Statement of the Test for LeaveThe test for granting leave to appeal under Rule 62.02(4) is well-settled.

It is recognized that leave should not be easily granted and the test to be met is avery strict one. There are two possible branches upon which leave may begranted. Both branches involve a two-part test and, in each case, both aspects ofthe two-part test must be met before leave may be granted.

[22]

Under Rule 62.02(4)(a), the moving party must establish that there is a

conflicting decision of another judge or court in Ontario or elsewhere (but not alower level court) and that it is, in the opinion of the judge hearing the motion,
“desirable that leave to appeal be granted.” A “conflicting decision” must be withrespect to a matter of principle, not merely a situation in which a different resultwas reached in respect of particular facts: Comtrade Petroleum Inc. v. 490300
[23]

Under Rule 62.02(4)(b), the moving party must establish that there is

reason to doubt the correctness of the order in question and that the proposedappeal involves matters of such importance that leave to appeal should begranted. It is not necessary that the judge granting leave be satisfied that thedecision in question was actually wrong – that aspect of the test is satisfied if thejudge granting leave finds that the correctness of the order is open to “very

[21]

serious debate”: Nazari v. OTIP/RAEO Insurance Co., [2003] O.J. No. 3442

282 (Gen. Div.). In addition, the moving party must demonstrate matters ofimportance that go beyond the interests of the immediate parties and involvequestions of general or public importance relevant to the development of the lawand administration of justice: Rankin v. McLeod, Young, Weir Ltd. (1986), 1986Analysis

[24]

It must be remembered that it is of the order for which leave to appeal is

requested, not the reasons for the making of that order: Consolidated EnfieldCorporation v. Blair, 1995 Carswell Ont. 3809.

[25]

Walmart has made the submission in its factum that Justice Barnes erred

at law in four ways:
1. He applied an incorrect evidentiary burden for a summary judgmentmotion, by concluding that the absence of evidence from potentialwitnesses identified by the plaintiff required a full trial of the action;

provided

unchallenged

noand

or

insufficient

uncontradicted

reasonsevidence

for

not

adduced

acceptingby

the

defendant Walmart on the motion, and for finding that issues ofcredibility exist;3. He misapprehended the evidentiary record before him; and4. He failed to remain seized of the matter, or to provide reasons fordeclining to do so.

[26]

The defendant Walmart therefore submits that there is good reason to

doubt the reasonableness of the order made by Justice Barnes.

[27]

Although the defendant Walmart submits there is good reason to doubt

the reasonableness of the order made by Justice Barnes dismissing the motionfor summary judgment, the test to be applied under Rule 62.02(4)(b) is whetherthe moving party has established that there is good reason to doubt thecorrectness of the order in question. The factums filed on this motion for leave toappeal by each the moving defendant and the plaintiff focused on whether thereis reason to doubt the correctness of the order made because the motions judgeplaced an incorrect evidentiary burden on Walmart as the moving party.

2. He

[28]

I do not propose to examine the evidence on the record with respect to

conclusions, or that he did not accept unchallenged or uncontradicted evidence,and for finding that issues of credibility exist. In my view, Justice Barnes gaveadequate reasons consistent with the standard set by R. v. M. (R.E.) 2008 SCC
51 where the court stated as follows:
35. The basis for the trial judge’s verdict must be “intelligible”, or capable of beingmade out. In other words, a logical connection between the verdict and the basisfor the verdict must be apparent. A detailed description of the judge’s process inarriving at the verdict is unnecessary.

[29]

The evidentiary record before Justice Barnes contained the evidence of

Ms. Rego that she saw a Walmart employee cleaning up liquid from the floornear the site of her fall. As I read the endorsement, Justice Barnes consideredthat evidence contradictory to the evidence filed in support of the motion. Withoutintending to parse his reasoning, Justice Barnes concluded the defendant’sevidence was not unchallenged or uncontradicted, and a basis for finding thatissues of credibility exist.

[30]

I also consider there to be a justifiable reason for Justice Barnes to find

that further evidence is necessary to decide whether Walmart had complied withits own inspection and maintenance program. This enhanced the importance ofobtaining evidence from one employee, Bibi Ishmail, who was in charge of

the alleged error that Justice Barnes provided no or insufficient reasons for his

ensuring inspection procedures were followed. In my view, Justice Barnes did not

[31]

I give little weight to the ground for leave to appeal raised by Walmart

that Justice Barnes failed to seize himself of this action after dismissing themotion. The power of a judge to seize himself or herself of a case after findingthere to be a genuine issue requiring a trial is discretionary in nature. Seeparagraphs 68 and in 78 to 79 of Hryniak v. Mauldin. The moving party has notsatisfied this court that Justice Barnes exercised his discretion unreasonably oroutside of guiding principles. The decision of Justice Barnes not to seize himselfis not a reviewable error.

[32]

Walmart submits in its motion for leave to appeal that there is good

reason to doubt the correctness of the order made by Justice Barnes becausehis approach to the evidentiary burden of the defendant on the motion forsummary judgment is inconsistent with the authorities that establish what thatevidentiary burden should be. Walmart argues that this is a question of generalimportance that extends beyond the interests of the litigants in this action.

[33]

The Supreme Court of Canada in Hryniak v. Mauldin described the

circumstances in which no genuine issue requiring a trial can be found on amotion for summary judgment. Those circumstances are available on the motion

misapprehend this evidence.

when and where the motion judge can, with confidence, make the necessary

just result in a proportionate, more expeditious and less expensive manner.

[34]

Although the court in Hryniak v. Mauldin recognized the summary

judgment procedure to be a legitimate alternative to the conventional trial for theadjudication of civil disputes, the court reserved some concern about when thesummary judgment procedure will not provide a fair and just process. Atparagraph 50 of Hryniak v. Mauldin, Justice Karakatsanis said this:

[50]
These principles are interconnected and all speak to whether summaryjudgment will provide a fair and just adjudication. When a summary judgmentmotion allows the judge to find the necessary facts and resolve the dispute,proceeding to trial would generally not be proportionate, timely or costeffective. Similarly, a process that does not give a judge confidence in herconclusions can never be the proportionate way to resolve a dispute. It bearsreiterating that the standard for fairness is not whether the procedure is asexhaustive as a trial, but whether it gives the judge confidence that she can findthe necessary facts and apply the relevant legal principles so as to resolve thedispute.

[35]

In terms of using the enhanced fact finding powers provided under Rules

20.04(2.1) or 20.04(2.2) , Justice Karakatsanis had this to say when consideringthe use of those enhanced powers unless it would not be the interests of justiceto do so:

[56]
evidenceavailableadduced

While I agree that a motion judge must have an appreciation of thenecessary to make dispositive findings, such an appreciation is not onlyat trial. Focusing on how much and what kind of evidence could beat a trial, as opposed to whether a trial is “requir[ed]” as the Rule

findings of fact on the evidence and apply the relevant legal principles to reach a

[57]
On a summary judgment motion, the evidence need not be equivalent tothat at trial, but must be such that the judge is confident that she can fairlyresolve the dispute. A documentary record, particularly when supplemented bythe new fact-finding tools, including ordering oral testimony, is often sufficient toresolve material issues fairly and justly. The powers provided in Rules 20.04(2.1)
and (2.2) can provide an equally valid, if less extensive, manner of fact finding.

[36]

The law is clear that the onus is on the moving party to establish that

there is no genuine issue requiring a trial, and that summary judgment can begranted on the evidentiary record before the court. However, it has also beenheld that once the moving party has satisfied that onus, the party responding tothe motion must put all available evidence before the court if it is the intention toshow there is a genuine issue that only a trial can resolve.

[37]

Walmart submits that all of the evidence given in support of its motion for

summary judgment met the test under Hyrniak v. Mauldin to provide JusticeBarnes with the basis to make the necessary findings of fact, and to apply therelevant legal principles to dismiss this action. Walmart further argues thatJustice Barnes could have adjudicated the core issue of liability on theevidentiary

record as the more expeditious and less expensive way

adjudicating that issue on the merits.

of

directs, is likely to lead to the bar being set too high. The interest of justicecannot be limited to the advantageous features of a conventional trial, and mustaccount for proportionality, timeliness and affordability. Otherwise, theadjudication permitted with the new powers — and the purpose of theamendments — would be frustrated.

[38]

In particular, Walmart states that the following evidence was filed to meet

1. A clear CCTV video showing the incident in which it can be seen thatthere is no liquid or debris on the floor;2. Affidavits of three witnesses who were at the scene of the accidentwithin moments, all of whom deposed there was no liquid or debrison the floor; and3. Photos taken of the floor shortly after the accident that does notdepict any liquid or debris on the floor.

[39]

Walmart has provided several authorities about the assumption the court

is entitled to make on a motion for summary judgment that all available evidencehas been put before the motions judge to determine whether he or she can makethe necessary findings of fact, and to apply the relevant legal principles.

[40]

In Shapiro v. John Doe, 2016 ONSC 2956, Justice Pollack discusses the

burden of proof on the moving party, and the evidentiary burden on theresponding party as follows:

[6]87. Although the burden of proof on this motion is on Economical to prove that it

this purpose:

[41]

Walmart also relies on the decision of this court in Paramandham v.

Holmes, 2015 ONSC 1903 to argue that the responding party may not chooseagainst using the evidence gathering tools available under the Rules of CivilProcedure, and then oppose the motion for summary judgment on the basis thatmore evidence will be available at trial. Walmart advances the argument thatwhere a party opposing a motion for summary judgment makes a tacticaldecision not to pursue potential evidence for use on a motion for summaryjudgment, the court should not second guess those tactical decisions. In keepingwith this theme, Justice Myers observed in ThyssenKrupp Elevator (Canada) Ltd.
v. Amos, 2014 ONSC 3910 at paragraph 44 as follows:

[44]
I am not suggesting that summary judgment motions can be used toavoid a party’s production obligations. But, it is not my role to second-guesscounsel’s tactical choices. Faced with several avenues to seek production fromthe defendants to respond to the motion for summary judgment, the plaintiffchose to limit its investigations and just ask for the motion to be dismissed so theparties can go to discovery. As noted above, counsel could have asked fordocuments on cross-examination, sought undertakings, or served summonses towitnesses. Counsel could have brought a motion for directions or while atScheduling Court asked for documents or, in the defendants’ case, sought tocontrol the cost of disclosure.

[42]

Walmart argues that Justice Barnes made a reviewable error in law by

holding it to a higher standard than that required by law. Conversely, the moving

is entitled to a dismissal of this action, the Plaintiff does have the burden ofproving that there is evidence on this motion to support his claim. The Plaintiffmust prove through evidence that there is a genuine issue requiring a trial. It isclear that the Plaintiff must “lead trump or risk losing” and cannot rely on thepossibility that other evidence will be adduced at trial will support his claim.

defendant argues that Justice erred by requiring Walmart as the moving party to

already discharged its onus and the evidentiary burden had shifted to the plaintiffMs. Rego as the responding party. In requiring evidence from those witnesseswho had not filed affidavits, Walmart argues that Justice Barnes made areviewable error by finding there to be a genuine issue requiring a trial in respectof that missing evidence when it was incumbent on the responding party to puther best foot forward, or to “risk trump or risk losing”.

[43]

It is important for this court to make the observation that Ms. Smith, Ms.

Ishmail and the CCTV operator had responsibilities central to the narrative. Allthree individuals were employed by Walmart and within the control of Walmart togive evidence. I would have thought that if Walmart was intent on putting its bestfoot forward to satisfy its onus as the moving party, it would have providedevidence from each of those sources.

[44]

Justice Barnes found that the evidence of the witnesses who attended to

Ms. Rego after the fall, and the evidence of Ms. Rego created a credibility issueabout whether there was liquid or debris on the floor at the time of the fall. Forreasons given, including the observation that Walmart did not provide evidencefrom Sherry Smith, Bibi Ishmail or the CCTV operator, Justice Barnes concludedthe existing record reveals there to be a genuine issue requiring a trial.

obtain evidence from witnesses who had not filed affidavits when Walmart had

[45]

In my view, it is not necessary to address the calibration of where a

party’s burden of proof, or where, if applicable, the responding party should havedone more to meet an evidentiary burden to successfully oppose the motion.

[46]

It is not my function on this motion to second guess the motions judge

who concluded on the evidentiary record that he could not find the facts on whichto apply the law to dispose of the action on its merits. Different judges perceivethe evidentiary record differently, and are entitled to make a determination aboutthe sufficiency of evidence, provided there is some basis for reaching thoseconclusions.

[47]

Justice Barnes found the insufficient evidence before him gave rise to a

genuine issue requiring a trial. Justice Barnes also found that to use theadditional powers provided under Rule 20.04(2.1) would simply duplicate a trial.
He essentially concluded that it would not be in the interest of justice to use thosepowers.

[48]

In conclusion, Justice Barnes dismissed Walmart’s motion for summary

judgment and ordered that the matter proceed to trial.

motions judge requires more evidence than is necessary to meet the moving

[49]

The questions of proof on the motion for summary judgment may be of

become a matter of public importance.

[50]

The motion of the defendant Walmart for leave to appeal the order of

Justice Barnes is therefore dismissed.
Costs

[51]

If either party seeks costs on this motion, they may file written

submissions consisting of no more than three pages, not including a Bill of Costs,by June 7, 2017. The other party shall then have until June 21, 2017 to fileresponding materials limited to the same extent. No reply submissions arepermitted without leave. All written materials may be sent by fax to my judicialassistant, Ms. Priscilla Gutierrez, at 905-456-4834 in Brampton.

___________________________
Emery J
DATE:

May 26, 2017

great interest to the parties, but they do not transcend their private interests to

SUPERIOR
ONTARIO

RE:

COURT

OF

JUSTICE

-

MARIA REGO, PlaintiffWALMART CANADA CORP,Defendant

BEFORE:

EMERY J.

COUNSEL: Barjinder Kalsi and ThomasLong, for the PlaintiffStephen G. Ross and AndrewYolles, for the Defendant

DECIS I O N ON THE
D E F E N D A N T ’ S MO T I O N F O R
L E AV E T O AP P E A L

EMERY J
DATE:

May 26, 2017

CITATION: Rego v. Walmart, 2017 ONSC 2599
COURT FILE NO.: CV-14-1650-00
DATE: 20170526

