CITATION: Rheaume v. HMQ Ontario, 2017 ONSC 3021
COURT FILE NO.: 14-60313
DATE: 2017/05/16

RE:

Jean Paul Rheaume and Therese Charron, PlaintiffsAND
Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Ontario, John Barbro, Tyler Roy and MelissaSchell, Officer Doe and Officer Smith, Defendants

BEFORE:

Justice Robert N. Beaudoin

COUNSEL: Rita Bambers for the Defendant HMQ OntarioJames McMahon for John Barbro, Defendant, Plaintiff by CrossclaimHEARD:

In WritingENDORSEMENT

[1]

The Defendant, Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Ontario (“the Crown”) seeks to stay

the order of Master Champagne, dated March 6, 2017 pending an appeal of that order which isscheduled to be heard on September 7, 2017. The Master’s decision addresses the order in whichmotions by the Crown to strike the cross-claim of the defendant John Barbro, (“Barbro”), andBarbro’s motion compelling the Crown to file a comprehensive statement of defence, should beheard.

[2]

The plaintiff in this action was an inmate at the Ottawa-Carleton Detention Centre and

seeks damages for injuries he sustained when one or more of the individually named defendants,all correctional officers employed by the Crown, allegedly used excessive force against him.

[3]

After the incident, employees of the Crown conducted an investigation and the Crown

terminated the defendant Barbro on November 29, 2011. Barbro was a unionized employee

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

represented by the Ontario Public Service Employees Union. The employment relationship wasgoverned by a collective agreement. Barbro chose to challenge his dismissal from employment

agreement.

[4]

The grievance was settled on the eve of an arbitration hearing in February 2014. The

parties signed minutes of settlement and Barbro agreed to terms in exchange for signing a fulland final release in favour of the Crown.

[5]

When Barbro defended the personal injury action initiated by the injured inmate, he

sought to cross-claim against the Crown for wrongful dismissal, malicious prosecution, andnegligent investigation into the incident by the Crown. He also seeks damages for defamation,alleging that he was portrayed in the press as having assaulted the plaintiff, based on unspecifiedstatements from unspecified persons. The Crown maintains that the substance of Barbro’s crossclaim arises from his employment relationship with the Crown and that this court is withoutjurisdiction to hear the cross-claim. Moreover, Crown maintains that the cross-claim is an abuseof process given that there were minutes of settlement executed between the parties whichcontained a full and final release of all of Barbro’s outstanding employment- related matters.

[6]

The Crown advised of its intention to bring a motion to strike the cross-claim.

Barbro

indicated that he intended to note the Crown in default if it did not file a defence. As a result, theCrown filed a pro forma statement of defence to the cross-claim. Barbro then advised of hisintention to bring a motion to strike the Crown’s defence as failing to comply with the Rules ofCivil Procedure and for summary judgment against the Crown.

and all outstanding employment related issues by filing a grievance as required by the collective

[7]

The parties then attended at a case conference before Master Champagne who ordered the

Crown to file a comprehensive statement of defence to the cross-claim by May 12, 2017. She

not give up his right to proceed with his motion to strike the Crown’s defence, she then set twomotion dates, one for November 29, 2017 and the second for January 8, 2018.

[8]

If Barbro was content with the new statement defence, the Crown’s motion to strike

would proceed on November 29, 2017 and the January date would be cancelled. If Barbro wasnot satisfied with it, then his motion to strike the Crown’s defence would proceed on that dateand the Crown’s motion would be heard on January 8, 2008.

[9]

The Crown seeks to stay the Master’s order because that order, in effect, determines the

defendant Barbro’s motion by requiring the Crown to first file a comprehensive statement ofdefence to the cross-claim by May 12, 2017 without first determining whether the court hasjurisdiction over the cross-claim. The Crown seeks to appeal that order and the earliest appealdate that it could was able to obtain was September 7, 2017.

[10]

Barbro has filed extensive material in reply to this motion to stay in support of his claims

against the Crown. The only issue before me whether I should grant a stay of MasterChampagne’s order.
The Law

[11]

Section 17(a) of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O., c. C.43 provides for an appeal to a

judge of an interlocutory order of a Master. Rule 62.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure govern

added that the Crown agreed to this subject to its right to appeal her order. Since Barbro would

the conduct of the appeal. In this case, Master Champagne’s endorsement at the Case Conference

[12]

Rule 3.04 (4) provides:
Non-Compliance
(4) If a party fails to comply with a timetable, a judge or case management mastermay, on any other party’s motion,
(a) stay the party’s proceeding;
(b) dismiss the party’s proceeding or strike out the party’s defence; or
(c) make such other order as is just. O. Reg. 438/08, s. 6.
f

[13]

Notwithstanding the informality of a case conference, a Master’s order that directs a party

to take step in a proceeding is nevertheless an interlocutory order. As Rule 3.04(4) makes clear,there are serious consequence if a party fails to comply with a timetable order.

[14]

Rule 63.01 applies to a stay pending an appeal. Since there is no automatic stay of an

order other than for payment of money and counsel for Barbro would not agree to allow theappeal to be disposed of prior to insisting on the delivery of the Crown’s statement of defence tohis cross-claim, this motion to stay is necessary. This motion is brought in writing since theCrown could not obtain a hearing date prior to May 12, 2017, for either the appeal or for themotion to stay.

[15]

The test on an application for a stay is the same on an application for and interlocutory

injunction:
(1) is there a serious issue to be tried?
(2) would compliance with the order cause irreparable harm? and

was a timetable order.

(3) what is the balance of convenience?1

The threshold on the first issue is a low one. I am satisfied that there is a serious issue to

be tried with respect to this Court’s jurisdiction and the Master’s order.

[17]

As for irreparable harm, the Crown cites the expense of defending a cross-claim over

which the court may have no jurisdiction and which may constitute an abuse of process. Moresignificantly, the Crown claims that the settlement privilege with respect to the matters beforethe grievance settlement board will be breached if the Crown is required to file a morecomprehensive statement of defence. In my view, the expense of defending the cross-claim is amatter for costs and I am not satisfied that the Crown would be required to breach the settlementprivilege to any greater degree that it proposes to do in its intended motion to strike the crossclaim. Having said that, failure to stay the order of Master Champagne would irreparably harmthe Crown’s appeal by rendering it moot.

[18]

I conclude that the balance of convenience favours granting the stay. Given that only

Barbro’s cross-claim will be examined on the Crown’s motion to strike, anything contained theCrown’s statement of defence to the cross-claim will be irrelevant and a more comprehensivestatement of defence to the cross-claim will be of no use to Barbro when the Court considerswhether it has jurisdiction over Barbro’s cross-claim.

[19]

1

Costs of this motion to stay are reserved to the hearing of the appeal.

R.J.R. MacDonald Inc. V. Canada (Attorney General) [1944] 1 S.C.R. 311 at para 46.

[16]

Mr. Justice Robert N. Beaudoin

Date: May 16, 2017

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
RE:

Jean Paul Rheaume and Therese Charron,PlaintiffsAND
Her Majesty the Queen in Right ofOntario, John Barbro, Tyler Roy andMelissa Schell, Officer Doe and OfficerSmith, Defendants

BEFORE:

Mr. Justice Robert N. Beaudoin

COUNSEL: Rita Bambers for the Defendant HMQ
OntarioJames McMahon for John Barbro,Defendant, Plaintiff by Crossclaim

ENDORSEMENT

BEAUDOIN J.
Released: May 16, 2017

CITATION: Rheaume v. HMQ Ontario, 2017 ONSC 3021
COURT FILE NO.: 14-60313
DATE: 2017/05/16

