CITATION: Richardson v. Cuddy, 2017 ONSC 3186
COURT FILE NO.: 10-CV-395172
MOTION HEARD: 20170510

RE:

James Richardson, Maureen Richardson and Maureen Richardson, In Trust,PlaintiffsAND:
Loftus John Robert Cuddy, Defendant

BEFORE:

Master Mills

COUNSEL: D. Silver, Counsel for the PlaintiffsC. Tucker, Counsel for the DefendantHEARD:

May 10, 2017
REASONS FOR DECISION

[1]

Each party has brought a motion in this matter – the plaintiffs seek to have a Registrar’sdismissal set aside and if that motion is granted, the defendant seeks to have the actiondismissed for delay. For the reasons to follow, the plaintiffs’ motion is granted; thedefendant’s motion is denied.

[2]

It is admitted by both counsel that the relevant test to set aside a Registrar’s DismissalOrder is the application of the Reid Factors with a contextual analysis in an effort tobalance the interests of the parties and to ensure justice is done in all of thecircumstances.1

[3]

The Reid Factors require the moving party toa. provide an adequate explanation for the litigation delay;b. lead evidence to establish inadvertence in missing the deadline;c. demonstrate the motion was brought promptly; andd. establish there was no significant prejudice to the defendant in presenting theircase at trial as a result of the plaintiff’s delay.

1

Reid v. Dow Corning Corp., [2001] O.J. No. 2365 at paras. 40-41; reversed on other grounds, [2002] O.J. No. 3414
(Div. Ct.); H. B. Fuller Company v. Rogers (Rogers Law Office), 2015 ONCA 173 at paras. 20-27.

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

[4]

The plaintiff bears the primary onus to address the Reid Factors with respect to theconduct of the action, however the defendant’s conduct will also be a relevantconsideration in the court’s analysis.4

[5]

In the exercise of my discretion in this matter, I am particularly cognizant of the Court ofAppeal decision in H. B. Fuller Company v. Rogers wherein the court considered thecountervailing policies of deciding actions on their merits but in a manner that is timelyand efficient so as to ensure public confidence in the administration of justice ismaintained at all times. The bias must always favour resolving disputes on their merits.
“Procedural rules are the servants of justice not its master … We should strive to avoid apurely formalistic and mechanical application of time lines that would penalize parties fortechnical non-compliance and frustrate the fundamental goal of resolving disputes ontheir merits.”5

[6]

This approach is all the more pronounced when the dismissal for delay is as a result of anerror committed by counsel. The inadvertence of counsel ought not to result in theirrevocable loss by the client of the right to proceed to a determination of the action on itsmerits.6

[7]

Examining the Reid Factors in the context of this action, it is conceded the motion to setaside the dismissal order was brought promptly, without delay.

[8]

This action is a solicitor’s negligence claim in respect of five civil actions commenced bythe plaintiffs and for which the defendant provided legal services. The Statement ofClaim was issued on January 15, 2010 and amended on January 27, 2010. The Statementof Defence was filed on June 24, 2011. Documentary production followed with tenvolumes of documents being delivered by the plaintiffs on April 12, 2012. Theunderlying civil actions were also proceeding during this timeframe.

[9]

There were delays in the prosecution of this action for various reasons, including effortsbeing exerted to settle the matter which unfortunately proved to be unsuccessful. A
month by month analysis of the delay is not appropriate. 7 The end result of this period ofdelay was a consent order dated December 24, 2014 setting a timetable which wasperemptory to the plaintiff.
Mediation, examinations for discovery, motions forundertakings and refusals were all to be completed by May 29, 2015 and the action was

2

Scaini v. Prochnicki, 2007 ONCA 63.4
H. B. Fuller, supra., at para. 23.
5
Ibid., at paras. 25-26.
6
Ibid., at para. 27.
7
Carioca’s Import & Export Inc. v. Canadian Pacific Railway Limited, 2015 ONCA 592, at para. 52.
3

While it is not necessary to satisfy all four factors, the court will give due considerationto each when exercising its discretion.2 Prejudice will be the key consideration.3

[10]

The parties did participate in a mediation on February 23, 2015 in accordance with theconsent timetable. Mr. Richardson’s examination for discovery was held over three daysin April 2015 – not strictly within the time limit of the order but with the agreement ofcounsel for the defendant on a “without prejudice” basis. A similar concession was givento postpone Mrs. Richardson examination for discovery until June 2015 as the plaintiffs’
daughter was diagnosed with a malignant tumour which required surgery and treatmentduring March and April 2015. Counsel indicated a willingness to consider a furtherextension of time if one was needed. The plaintiffs have agreed to proceed to trial withoutan examination for discovery of the defendant.

[11]

A Small Claims Court action was commenced in February 2014 against the defendant torecover an adverse cost order issued in one of the underlying civil actions, which theplaintiffs allege was as a result of solicitor’s negligence. The defendant failed to defendthe Small Claims Court action and was noted in default. The plaintiffs agreed to set asidethe noting in default and dismiss the action in exchange for the defendant’s consent topermit a further amendment to the within Statement of Claim so as to include the reliefinitially sought in the Small Claims Court action. The draft Further Amended Statementof Claim was to be delivered by June 30, 2015 but an indulgence was granted bydefendant’s counsel to permit counsel to take advantage of the July 1 st statutory holidayand delivery of the draft claim was extended to 5:00 p.m. on July 2, 2015.

[12]

This indulgence resulted in the draft Further Amended Statement of Claim beingdelivered two days beyond the mandated set down date of June 30, 2015. The action wasadministratively dismissed.

[13]

The plaintiffs did exert substantial efforts to comply with the consent timetable and,where they did not, the defendant consented to the flexibility – albeit on a “withoutprejudice” basis. This is not a case where the plaintiffs simply ignored their obligationsto move the action forward with an utter disregard for the court ordered timetable. Theyhad serious, unforeseen family circumstances intervene which adversely impacted theirefforts.

[14]

I accept the uncontroverted evidence that the failure to set the action down for trial onJune 30, 2015 was as a result of counsel’s own inadvertence. His attention was focussedon providing a draft Further Amended Statement of Claim and the deadline to set theaction down was overlooked in the process. He was lulled into a false sense of securityby the defendant’s willingness to accommodate changes to the timetable and to permitthe delivery of the draft Further Amended Statement of Claim on July 2, 2015. Althoughfrequently reminded in various correspondence from the defendant’s counsel that strictadherence to the timetable was required, the June 30th set down date was simply missedby counsel for the plaintiffs as he addressed other issues in the litigation.

to be set down for trial by June 30, 2105. Significant steps were to be taken to move thisaction forward within a tight six month timetable.

The significant steps taken by the plaintiffs in the six months of the peremptory timetablereflects an intention to proceed with the action. The defendant’s characterization of areckless disregard for the timetable is unreasonable and unfair. The plaintiffs ought notlose their right to proceed to a trial on the merits of their claim solely as a result of theinadvertence of counsel.

[16]

There is no evidence before me of real prejudice to the defendant in presenting his case attrial. There has been extensive documentary production by both parties, the defendanthas his own file available for review, there are transcripts available from the plaintiff’sexamination for discovery and all parties continue to be available for trial. I do not implyany prejudice simply from the passage of time and I have not been persuaded that it is notpossible for the defendant to receive a fair trial as a result of the delays in this litigation.8

[17]

Moreover, the conduct of the defendant does not support any suggestion of prejudice as aresult of the delay. Timetables were established on a consent basis and varied toaccommodate the needs of the plaintiffs. It is noted those accommodations were grantedon a without prejudice basis to the defendant’s right to strictly rely on the provisions ofthe consent timetable order. Those without prejudice waivers do not however establishevidence of real prejudice.

[18]

In the context of the litigation as a whole, balancing the interests of both parties, I amsatisfied the plaintiffs have met their burden under the Reid Factors and the defendant hasfailed to establish real prejudice as a result of the overall delays in the litigation or as aresult of the Registrar’s Dismissal for failing to set the action down for trial in accordancewith the consent timetable. It is in the interests of justice that this action be permitted toproceed to an adjudication of the merits.

[19]

The Registrar’s Dismissal Order of June 30, 2015 is hereby set aside.

[20]

The defendant’s cross-motion seeks an order dismissing the action for delay and forfailing to comply with the consent timetable order of December 24, 2014 pursuant toRules 24 and 60.12 of the Rules of Civil Procedure.

[21]

As noted above, the delay has been adequately explained and there is no evidence of realor presumptive prejudice from the defendant to suggest a fair trial cannot occur in thecircumstances. I have not been persuaded that the delay in the prosecution of this actionhas been intentional or contumelious.9

[22]

The defendant has failed to meet the test for an order to dismiss this action for delaypursuant to Rule 24.01(1)(c).

[23]

Turning to Rule 60.12 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, the defendant seeks an orderdismissing the action as a result of the plaintiffs’ failure to adhere to the terms of the

8
9

Ibid. at para. 6, 49 & 57.

[15]

[24]

There is no dispute the plaintiffs failed to attend examinations for discovery and failed toset the action down for trial strictly in accordance with the timetable. They did breachthe timetable.

[25]

The defendant now seeks to enforce this provision of the order to dismiss the action,although he did not proceed on a without notice basis.

[26]

Dismissing an action for failure to adhere to an interlocutory order is an “extreme remedyand a last resort” which ought to be very cautiously considered by the court. It isdraconian in nature and should be invoked only in circumstances where there isdemonstrated conduct of complete disregard for the court’s procedures and flagrantdisrespect of the court’s authority.10

[27]

The threshold test for dismissing an action under Rule 60.12 is high. The breach ofinterlocutory order(s) must be “intentional, contumelious or without reasonable excuse orotherwise constitute an abuse of the court’s process”. 11

[28]

The plaintiffs conduct cannot be so characterized in this matter. I am not persuadedtherefore that the threshold test has been met to warrant dismissing the action under Rule60.12, even giving due consideration to the fact the relief was agreed upon in a consentorder at a time when the plaintiffs were represented by counsel.

[29]

The court has the inherent jurisdiction to enforce consent orders. Finality is important inlitigation and therefore courts ought to be cautious in setting aside orders, particularlythose made on consent.12 However, the interest of finality must never compromise theinterests of justice, particularly when the order is procedural in nature. 13 Again, thecourt’s bias must always favour resolving disputes on their merits.

[30]

I accept there is no evidence before me to suggest the plaintiffs did not understand theconsequences of consenting to an order permitting the dismissal of their action fornoncompliance with the fixed timetable. That does not however lessen the draconianeffect of enforcing the order under the present circumstances.

10
11
Provato v. Burgantin, 2003 CarswellOnt 2255 at para. 22.
12
Clatney v. Quinn Thiele Mineault Grodzki LLP, 2016 ONCA 377 at para. 57.
13
Re Beetown Honey Products Inc., 2004 CarswellOnt 4316 at para. 1.

interlocutory order establishing the timetable for setting this action down for trial. Theorder was obtained on a consent basis with the plaintiffs having the benefit of legaladvice. A term of the order provided that “if the Plaintiffs, or any of them, breach theattached timetable, the action shall be dismissed with costs on a without-notice motion ofthe Defendant”.

As noted above, the plaintiffs endeavoured to comply with the timetable requirements.
Where they did not, it was largely with the indulgence of counsel for the defendant.
Mediation was conducted as required; the examination for discovery of Mr. Richardsonwas conducted; the examination for discovery of Mrs. Richardson was deferred toaccommodate her need to be with their daughter while she underwent cancer treatment.
The failure to set the action down was an oversight by counsel for which the plaintiffsought not to be penalized.

[32]

In all of the circumstances, to enforce the order dismissing this action for the plaintiffs’
breach of the timetable would be a clear injustice and contrary to the fundamental goal ofthe court to resolve this action on its merits.

[33]

As such, I decline to enforce paragraph 3 of the December 24, 2015 order fixing thetimetable for this action. The defendant’s motion is denied.

[34]

If costs cannot be agreed upon, counsel may make submissions, not exceeding threepages in length together with a Costs Outline, within ten days hereof.

Master J. E. MillsDate: May 23, 2017

[31]

