CITATION: Robins v. Wagar, 2017 ONSC 3356
COURT FILE NO.: CV-09-616-00
DATE: 20170516

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
GEORGE ROBINS
) Graham F. Sirman, for the Plaintiff
Plaintiff )
– and –
WAYNE KENNETH WAGAR, JAMIE )
ALVES, and THE DOMINION OF )
CANADA
GENERAL
INSURANCE )
COMPANY, TYENDINAGA MOHAWK )
POLICE, NORTH SHORE TABACCO, )
ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA, )
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN IN RIGHT )
OF ONTARIO, LILY LAFORTE, JAMES )
KUNKEL AND THE MOHAWKS OF )
THE BAY OF QUINTE
Defendants )
) HEARD at Kingston: 16 May 2017
BETWEEN:

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
MEW J. (ORALLY)

[1]
Sylvia Robins was tragically killed in a car accident on the 22 nd of February, 2009.
Wayne Kenneth Wagar was criminally convicted as a result of the accident. He was driving thevehicle that struck the vehicle occupied by Sylvia Robins. Wagar was uninsured, unlicensed andimpaired by alcohol.

[2]
The defendants sued in this action have all now been released or settled with, with theexception of Wagar. He has been noted in default. The widower of Sylvia Robins, GeorgeRobins, now seeks judgment against Wagar for damages pursuant to s. 61 of the Family Law Act,R.S.O.1990, c.F.3.

ONTARIO

[3]
By virtue of his being noted in default, Wagar is deemed to be liable for the accident thattook Sylvia Robins' life. What remains is to assess what he is responsible for paying.

My wife Sylvia's death was absolutely devastating to me. I am dealing with myemotions on a daily basis. Attached hereto and marked as Exhibit C is a copy ofthe Victim Impact Statement I prepared some time ago, during Wayne KennethWagar's prosecution. Additionally, I am legally blind, and without hearing in oneear. My wife Sylvia provided to me, during our marriage, a tremendous amountof care and support in allowing me to carry out a normal life, given mydisabilities. In this action, therefore, my claim for damages involves not only aclaim for loss of care, guidance and companionship, but a very significant claimfor past and future attendant care.

[5]
Section 61 of the Family Law Act provides that, if a person is injured or killed by thefault or neglect of another, various enumerated individuals, including the spouse of such aperson, are entitled to recover "their pecuniary loss resulting from the injury or death of theperson from whom the person injured or killed is entitled to recover, or would have been entitled,if not killed, and to maintain an action for the purpose in a court of competent jurisdiction".

[6]
Subsection (2) of s. 61 expressly provides that the damages recoverable in a claim unders-s. (1) may include, referring to sub-paragraph (e): "an amount to compensate for the loss ofguidance, care and companionship that the claimant might reasonably have expected to receivefrom the person if the injury or death had not occurred".

[7]
In the case of Parsons Estate v. Guymer et al. (1998), 40 O.R. (3d) 445 (C.A.), the Courtconsidered the claim by a recently-retired executive, who was 62 years of age when a motorvehicle accident occurred which resulted in the death of his wife. About four months later, theplaintiff suffered a stroke, which was not caused or contributed to by the accident, but which lefthim unable to care for himself.

[8]
One of the issues that arose was whether or not, in determining the damages payable bythe responsible party in the motor-vehicle accident claim, such damages should includeconsideration of the services and care that would have been provided for Mr. Parsons, theplaintiff, by his wife, had she not been killed in that accident.

[9]
Madam Justice Weiler said this at paragraphs 10 and 11 of the Court of Appeal'sdecision:
In assessing damages, it is the value of the services by the particular wife to theparticular husband which must be determined. While the loss of the strokerelated caregiving functions that Margaret would have provided is incapable ofstrict arithmetical calculation, one starts with the proposition that the serviceswhich Margaret would have provided as a result of the appellant's stroke have a

[4]
The nature of Mr. Robins’ claim is eloquently captured in paragraph 3 of his Affidavit,sworn on the 16th of March, 2016, which says as follows:

quantifiable economic value. In assessing the loss of Margaret's stroke-relatedcare, the cost of replacing that care in the market place is an important measurewhich has two aspects. As a result of his stroke, Mr. Parsons is unable to engagein certain physical activities. He is also unable to perform certain managementfunctions pertaining to his daily living because he lacks judgment. The appellanthad a reasonable expectation that, had his wife not been killed, she would haveprovided the physical and managerial care he required as a result of his stroke.
It is not necessary for the injured person to prove that someone was actuallyemployed to the date of trial or will be employed in the future, to perform thesecaregiving functions. The aim of damages is to place the injured party as nearlyas possible in the situation he or she would have been in but for the actions of thetortfeasor.

[10] Section 61 talks of pecuniary loss. However, as cases assessing damage pursuant to s. 61
have evolved, it does appear that both pecuniary and non-pecuniary losses are captured by thislegislative provision. That much was confirmed by Mr. Justice Linden in Thornborrow v.
MacKinnon (1981), 123 D.L.R. (3d) 124; 32 O.R. (2d) 740, a decision of the Ontario High Courtof Justice, where he said, at page 129 (D.L.R.):
From now on, the damages awarded for injury to a child, or for the loss of the lifeof a child, include not only pecuniary losses but also the non-pecuniary elementsof guidance, care and companionship that parents and other relatives receivedfrom the child. Thus, when a member of the family is injured or killed, the courtsare now required to compensate the other members of the family for the othermembers of the family for certain losses they may suffer as a result, botheconomic and non-economic.

[12] I do not read the cases, and in particular the Parsons case, as precluding an approach toevaluation of a claim under s. 61(2)(e) of the Family Law Act which includes consideration ofthe actual economic losses that have been suffered by someone in the position of Mr. Robins.
Indeed, to use the language of Madam Justice Weiler, the cases do not eliminate an assessmentof the value of services by a particular wife to a particular husband.

[13] In the present case, the circumstances are exceptional. Sylvia Robins was effectively Mr.Robins' caregiver, and she was certainly his eyes and, to a lesser extent, his ears. Since herdeath, the circumstances of Mr. Robins have been described in a report prepared by an

Mr. Robins currently lives alone. His daughter and four grandchildren also live inNapanee. He relies on his daughter for assistance. However, she works both afull-time and a part-time job, and is busy with her family. Mr. Robins relies onfriends to provide support, but that support has diminished over time. He hasbenefited from the services of an intervenor from the CNIB who visits him forthree hours each week, and this individual assists Mr. Robins with household andcommunity activities.

[14] Clearly, he has been, and the reasonable assumption seems to be that he will remain, inthe future, requiring the type of support and assistance indicated in the Swanson & Associatesreport. And, of course, as he gets older, his needs are likely to increase.

[15]

Ms. Sutton's report recommends three types of assistance that Mr. Robins requires.

[16] Firstly, he needs personal care assistance, for such things as personal grooming, dressing,foot care, and other personal needs. Secondly, he requires home maintenance assistance,including such services as cleaning, daily assistance with tidying, garbage and recyclingremoval, lawn maintenance, snow removal, and general indoor maintenance and repairs asrequired, and daily assistance with reading mail, and financial management activities. Thirdly,he requires assistance with transportation and community mobility, for the purpose of attendingmedical appointments, participating in leisure and volunteer activities, and socialization.

[17] The value of these services, suggested by Ms. Sutton, totals $130,681 per annum. Backin 2010, an actuarial projection calculated that, at that time, the present value of the provision ofsuch services, going forward from 2010, in 2010 dollars, would be $880,701.59, and that wouldbe only until Sylvia Robins would have reached the age of seventy. Thereafter, it could beexpected that she would contribute to provide, at least, transportation assistance, valued at
$32,825 per annum.

[18] Mr. Sirman indicates, candidly, that Mr. Robins has not actually received all of theseservices, and no doubt there are economic reasons for his not having done so. However, what isimportant, and what is underscored by the approach which Madam Justice Weiler postulates, isthat, had Sylvia Robins been alive, she would have provided Mr. Robins with most, if not all, ofthose services. He has been deprived of them, and his quality of life has been significantlydiminished, as a result. It seems to me that that is part of what the loss of guidance, care andcompanionship, for someone who has lost a spouse, is comprised.

[19] It is very clear to me, appreciating the fact that the actuarial projections are somewhat outof date, that if an actuarial work-up was to be done today, the present value of past and futureservices would result in a very significant assessment. Mr. Sirman, fairly and correctly, in myview, does not seek a strict actuarial amount of damages. However, he does seek an amount

occupational therapist, Julia Sutton of Swanson & Associates. She notes in her report as follows
- appreciating this report was in April, 2010, but the submission of Mr. Sirman was to the effectthat this continues to accurately reflect the circumstances:

[20] In my view, such an amount would be $390,000. That is not a number that I haveplucked out of the sky. It is the equivalent of three years at $130,681 - bearing in mind that Ms.Robins would be 67, now, if she were still alive, and the evidence before me indicates that avaluation of services that she would provide would be approximately $130,681 per annum.
However, as Madam Justice Weiler said, a strict arithmetic approach is not appropriate. Theamount of $390,000 is intended to reflect the services of which Mr. Robins has been deprived forthe past eight years and going forward, and the care, guidance and companionship of his wife,that he could have reasonably expected to have received, but for the negligence of Mr. Wagar.

[21] Therefore, I am going to give judgment in that amount. In doing so, Mr. Sirman hasindicated to me that his client reached a settlement with Dominion of Canada General InsuranceCompany - Dominion being the insurer of the vehicle in which Ms. Robins was a passenger - upto the maximum available limit of $200,000, and that part of that arrangement requires anassignment of any judgment recovered by Mr. Robins to Dominion Insurance. So, on that basis,I am satisfied that there is no double recovery on the part of Mr. Robins, with respect to the
$200,000.

[22] I should also record that Mr. Sirman disclosed that a further $50,000 had been obtainedby way of settlement from other defendants, without any further recourse on the part of thoseparties. Because the amount which could have been awarded, on an actuarial basis, by way ofdamages against Mr. Wagar, could have been a lot greater than $390,000, I see no offence to theprinciple against double recovery, if that $50,000 figure is effectively ignored, for the purposesof Mr. Robins collecting those damages from Mr. Wagar. So, to be clear, he does not need togive any credit for the $50,000 figure.
[Submissions made regarding the form of the order and costs]

[23] The order is fine. I have just added, to the recitals, that the action against the otherdefendants was dismissed by order of the Registrar on the 19 th of June, 2015.

[24] I have included, in addition to damages of $390,000, $4,500 for costs, which is inclusiveof HST and disbursements.

Graeme Mew J.

Handed down: 16 May 2017 (orally)

which reflects an appropriate recognition of the significant and permanent loss which Mr. Robinshas suffered.

CITATION: Robins v. Wagar, 2017 ONSC 3356
COURT FILE NO.: CV-09-616-00
DATE: 20170516

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
GEORGE ROBINS
Plaintiff
– and –
WAYNE KENNETH WAGAR, JAMIE ALVES, andTHE DOMINION OF CANADA GENERAL
INSURANCE
COMPANY,TYENDINAGA
MOHAWK POLICE, NORTH SHORE TABACCO,ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA, HER
MAJESTY THE QUEEN IN RIGHT OF ONTARIO,LILY LAFORTE, JAMES KUNKEL AND THE
MOHAWKS OF THE BAY OF QUINTE
DefendantsREASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Mew J.

Handed down: 16 May 2017

