1
CITATION: Ryan v. Ryan, 2017 ONSC 1377
COURT FILE NO.: FS-13-386523
DATE: 20170519

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

JUSTIN BRADLEY RYAN
Applicant )
– and –
CORENA MARGARET RYAN
Respondent )

Gabrielle Pop-Lazic, for the Applicant

Corena Margaret Ryan, In Person

HEARD: February 27, 28 and March 1, 2, 3,6, 2017

WILSON J.
Was the Respondent Wife unjustly enriched by the Applicant Husband’s contributions tothe matrimonial home? If so, is this a rare case justifying the imposition of a remedialconstructive trust rather than relying on the division of net family property (NFP) under theFamily Law Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. F.3 [FLA]? Is the Applicant liable to pay spousal support to theRespondent when the slip and fall injury precipitating the Respondent’s need for supportoccurred post-separation?

[1]

Position of the Parties

[2]

The Matrimonial Home (the Home) is registered in the name of the Wife, CorenaMargaret Ryan (the Respondent). The Husband, Justin Bradley Ryan (the Applicant), seeks adeclaration that he is the 50% beneficial owner of the Home. Alternatively, he seeks a judgmentin the amount of $125,000.00.
The Respondent argues that the Applicant’s contribution to the improvements to theHome is recognized in the division of NFP. The agreed-upon market value at separation takesinto account any improvements to the Home made by the Applicant during the marriage.

[3]

[4]

The significant debts of the Respondent, including a large debt to Revenue Canadaaccrued during the marriage, exceeded the value of the Home at separation and result in her

ONTARIO

2

[5]

If the Applicant obtains a declaration that he is a 50% beneficial owner of the Home, hewill be in a positive NFP position of $52,833.00 and the Respondent will be in a very significantnet negative NFP position of (-$137,910.49).

[6]

There is no evidence before me as to the present value of the Home. Given the Torontoreal estate market, a reasonable inference is that the value of the Home has increasedsignificantly since 2012.

[7]

The Respondent argues that the elements of unjust enrichment have not been established.
In light of the debts she accrued, which were used for family purposes, the imposition of aremedial constructive trust on these facts would be unjust.

[8]

Concerning the second issue, the Applicant argues that he is not responsible to payspousal support because the circumstances giving rise to the need occurred post-separation.
Spousal support is not an insurance policy. The Respondent claimed that she had a pre-existingmedical problem during the marriage that was exacerbated by the slip and fall accident.
Challenges in this Trial

[9]

The Respondent was unrepresented. The Respondent was denied legal aid just daysbefore the trial began. She had been unrepresented through much of the proceeding. Counsel hadassisted in preparing the documents in support of the NFP, but unfortunately there were gaps inthe relevant documents.

[10] Basic documents relevant to considering the merits of the trust claim, such as bankrecords of the parties and tax returns verifying income, were not available. Medical records ofthe Respondent during the marriage relevant to the support claim were not before the court.

[11] Some documentation was provided during the trial. Some documents were marked asexhibits to be filed and were produced after the conclusion of the trial, with the right of theparties to be recalled if requested. Some relevant documents were not produced at all.

[12] The documents that were filed after the conclusion of the hearing include the Applicant’sincome tax information from 1997 to 2005 and his medical reports during the period of hisdisability while he was renovating the Home. The Respondent filed an up to date statement ofher current RRSP holdings, as there was an error in her financial statement. She also filed atyped legible copy of a doctor’s note that had been filed as an exhibit during the trial but wasillegible.

having a negative NFP. Without considering the trust claim, the agreed upon figures result in theRespondent having a negative NFP of (-$63,070.07) and the Applicant having a negative NFP of
(-$10,959.49). The application of the provisions of the FLA, with both parties in a net debtposition at separation, therefore results in no equalization payment payable by either party.

3

[13] Counsel for the Applicant, in spite of objections on the record, was helpful in cooperatingto obtain some of the missing documents that were readily available but were not in evidence. I
thank her for her assistance.

supplementary submissions in light of these documents filed after the conclusion of the trial.

[15] This matter proceeded as a traditional trial. I suggest, at least for the unrepresented party,more extensive use could be made of Rule 7.2(i) of the Family Law Rules, O. Reg. 114/99,which allows a witness to give all or part of his or her evidence by affidavit. This approachwould ensure that relevant evidence is before the court. Before trial, either an independent judgeor the assigned trial judge could ensure that the appropriate and relevant evidence to address thematters in issue is before the court, promoting fairness to both parties in the ever-increasingnumber of trials with unrepresented litigants.
Outline of these Reasons

[16] My reasons will address the following:
(a)

Outline of the undisputed facts

(b)

Findings of credibility and reliability

(c)

Findings of fact on the disputed issues

(d)

Outline of the law of unjust enrichment and conclusions

(e)

Consideration and entitlement and need for spousal support

Background Facts

[17] The parties were married in 1997 and have two children: Justice Corena Ryan, now 18,and Reign Justin Ryan, now 17. The parties separated in November 2012, after 15 years ofmarriage.

[18] The Applicant is 45 years of age. Throughout the marriage, he worked in construction invarious capacities, except when injured in 2008 and 2009. The Respondent acknowledges that heis a very talented, skilled self-taught carpenter.
The Respondent, also age 45, is a First Nation member of the M’Chigeeng band fromManitoulin Island. Her First Nation status is traced from her father. Her mother was Italian. TheRespondent was born and raised in Toronto. She has a biology degree from Trent University.
She had been a part-time student for the last five years of the marriage and completed her degreein 2013, shortly after separation. Her dream, prior to the slip and fall accident, was to become amedical doctor working in the Aboriginal community.

[19]

[14] Neither party sought to add additional evidence, to recall a witness, or to make

4

worked full-time for Native Leasing Services. She worked with First Nation people in theToronto area with HIV and Aids. Her work in palliative care and coordinating volunteers was, inher words, to “coordinate the journey, going to the spirit world”. For the last several years of themarriage, the Respondent held a supervisory position and was involved in policy and protocoldiscussions in the provincial, national, and international spheres.

[21] The Respondent’s status under the Indian Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-5 is passed to thechildren. Therefore, the children are able to attend university that is fully funded, including allcosts of tuition, books, residence, and living expenses.

[22] In spite of initial acrimony, the issues concerning the children were resolved in March2014. Justice, their daughter, lived with the Respondent until she began attending her first year ofuniversity at McMaster University in September 2016. She is living in residence. Reign, theirson, is in grade twelve and is living with the Applicant. He has been accepted at two universitiesand will begin his university studies in September 2017. He too will be living in residence. Thereis no claim advanced by the Applicant for child support.
Revenue Canada Tax Debt

[23] A major stumbling block in this proceeding is the large tax debt owed by the Respondentto Revenue Canada that accumulated during the marriage.

[24] The Respondent’s employer is located on Six Nations of the Grand River Nation Reserve.
The Respondent was one of the litigants affected by a test case challenge as to whether or not herincome was tax exempt pursuant to section 87(1)(b) of the Indian Act. The challenge had goneon for a number of years. The challenge was ultimately unsuccessful.

[25] The test case, involving three employees (not including the Respondent) who worked forNative Leasing Services, proceeded over the years through various levels of court, including theTax Court of Canada in 2014 and the Federal Court of Appeal in 2015.

[26] Had the Respondent performed her work while residing on a reserve, her income wouldnot be taxable. The legal analysis in the test case reviewed the “connecting factors” andconcluded that the employment income for each Appellant in the test case was situated offreserve and hence taxable.

[27] In April 2016 the Supreme Court of Canada denied leave to appeal from the FederalCourt of Appeal decision, ending the challenge.

[28] The Respondent has not paid income taxes on her income earned from 1997 at the date ofmarriage to 2016, when her employment was terminated. Over the years, the Respondent hasbeen filing a tax return showing zero income. Revenue Canada in turn has been assessing theRespondent for her taxes on income earned throughout the marriage to the date of separation andthereafter. Each year, the Respondent contested the assessment.

[20] During the marriage (apart from the first year where she worked ¾ time), the Respondent

5

[29] In 2015, after the conclusion of the proceedings before the Federal Court of Appeal,

[30]

Presently, the agreed upon debt owed by the Respondent to Revenue Canada is in excessof $325,000.00. The Respondent was successful in having some of the interest charges reversedbecause of the test case litigation. These are the figures taking into account that reduction.

[31] It is the debt owed to Revenue Canada at separation of $251,939.28, coupled with otherdebts, that results in the Respondent having a negative NFP at separation.
Applicant’s Work History and Earnings

[32] In the early years of the marriage, the Applicant was a shareholder with his father andmother in a construction company that bought three homes, performed significant renovations,and then sold them for profit. According to his father, he and his father received draws of $800
per week. This appears to be corroborated by the tax information filed after conclusion of thetrial.

[33] Two projects produced profits after paying the weekly draw ($30,000, and $70,000). Theprofits were paid into the company to fund the next project. Unfortunately, the third and lastproject was a disaster. Sometime after 2001, the company declared bankruptcy as the last projectlost some $650,000.00. The Applicant declared personal bankruptcy in 2004. His father alsodeclared personal bankruptcy for the second time at around the same time. The Applicant thenwent into the construction business with a partner, then on his own, and earned modest nettaxable earnings.

[34] There were two particularly difficult years—one when the Applicant declared bankruptcydisclosing negative income, and another when his truck and equipment were stolen and he againhad negative income.

[35] In 2008, the Husband had a back injury requiring two surgical interventions. He was onshort-term disability from February 2009 to December 2010, receiving $2,000 tax free permonth. He took training to become a mortgage broker and earned a small amount of income in2009 and 2010 in this field.

[36] The Respondent testified that the Applicant’s earnings throughout the marriage wereerratic until he obtained stable employment as a property manager in 2010, where he works tothis day.

[37] A summary of the earnings of both parties throughout the marriage is confirmed in
“Schedule A”. Most of the earnings were confirmed in tax documents and, for some of the years,

Revenue Canada registered a lien against the Home for the Respondent’s tax arrears from 1997
to 2012 in the amount of $251,939.28. This debt remains outstanding. The parties acknowledgethat this debt of $251,939.28 is the tax arrears related to the income earned by the Respondentduring the marriage.

6
viva voce evidence sufficed. I accept the earnings of the parties throughout the marriage asoutlined in Schedule A.

as a property manager. The Respondent helped the Applicant prepare his resume. He got the joband has worked there earning stable income from November 2010 to the present. He is presentlyearning $82,000.00 per year.
Respondent’s Work History and Earnings

[39] During the marriage, the Respondent worked for Native Leasing Services. TheRespondent’s net income before taxes increased to approximately $60,000.00 when she wasgiven the supervisory position. The family then moved to Harbour Square and rented for fiveyears prior to the purchase of the Home.

[40] The Respondent’s reported taxable income as confirmed on Schedule A was somewhathigher than the amounts she actually received, as the employer paid for various benefits deductedfrom her income (CPP, etc.).

[41] Prior to the marriage, the Respondent had put her potential income tax amounts aside in aseparate account until the taxability of her income was determined. However, these tax fundswere used to pay for the parties’ wedding expenses.

[42] After the marriage, the parties used all of the Respondent’s gross income. Both the netincome and the taxes were deposited into the Respondent’s account and used for familypurposes. No amounts were put aside for potential tax liability if the challenge with RevenueCanada was unsuccessful.
Acquisition of the Home

[43] During the marriage, the parties spent their earnings to the limit and then some. Prior tothe purchase of the Home, they incurred debt through the joint line of credit at its maximum limitof $30,000.00 used to finance a lifestyle (a second vehicle, a boat, and a camper trailer, and toconsolidate credit card debts).

[44] In the fall of 2008, the Respondent found out about a programme called the Miziwe BiikAboriginal Housing Program (AHP), which was designed to encourage eligible First Nationmembers living off reserve to purchase a home.

[45] Their daughter wanted a dog and the family sought some permanence and financialstability.

[46] The Respondent applied for the AHP loan as soon as the program was introduced. Shequalified for a loan in the amount of $17,400.00 (the Loan). The Loan would be forgiven if theRespondent owned the Home for 20 years. The Loan did not require any monthly payments. Ifthe Home is sold, or title is transferred prior to expiry of the 20 years, then the original capital

[38] In 2010, a friend of the Respondent told her about the job opportunity for the Applicant

7
amount becomes payable, along with the capital appreciation amount, which is the proportionateshare that the Loan represented in relation to the original purchase price.

limited. In the fall of 2008, they were renting in Harbour Square. The parties had no assets andonly debt.

[48] The Respondent would not qualify for the Loan and mortgage with the joint line of credit
$30,000.00 debt. The Applicant arranged for a short-term loan with a mortgage broker totemporarily repay the joint line of credit. The Respondent then qualified for the Loan and theMortgage. After the Home was purchased, the short-term loan was immediately paid back to themortgage broker from the line of credit, reinstating the debt. This debt had not been repaid priorto separation and is outstanding to this day.

[49] At the time of the purchase of the Home, the Respondent was working full-time earning
$61,000.00 per year. The Applicant’s taxable net income in 2008 was minus $13,345. From 2008
to 2010, the Applicant was off work and in receipt of disability payments of $2,000.00 permonth. He was working towards obtaining his mortgage brokers licence and received modestincome from that endeavour ($15,933.00 in 2009 and $6,065.00 in 2010).

[50] The Home is located at 244 Woodbine Ave, Toronto. It was purchased by the Respondentfor $380,000.00 in October 2008 and the purchase closed in February 2009.

[51] A $5,000.00 deposit was provided to purchase the Home. The Respondent confirmed thatshe saved the deposit from her salary. Given the Applicant’s precarious financial status in 2008,it is not clear from the evidence that the Applicant made any contribution to the deposit.

[52] Apart from the $5,000.00 deposit, the Home was fully financed by way of the Loan of
$17,400.00 and a mortgage in the amount of $372,371.50. The parties also had their debt for thejoint line of credit of $30,000,00.

[53] After the acquisition of the Home in 2009, the Applicant and his father did considerable

physical labour to improve it. As well, the Applicant’s parents provided the parties with a gift of
$5,000.00 to allow them to finish the basement apartment to generate income for the family.

[54] The Applicant testified at some length and in detail about the various components of thework performed. The Applicant valued the total of the work performed and materials contributedby himself and his father as between $47,000.00 and $55,000.00 had the parties had to engage athird party contractor. The Applicant testified that the work and materials provided increased thevalue of the Home at the time the work was done by $100,000.00.

[55] It is this work and materials that underpin the Applicant’s claim for unjust enrichmentand constructive trust.
Title of the Home Registered in Respondent’s name

[47] The parties’ means to acquire the Home, both in terms of capital and income, was very

8

[56] By separation in 2012, taking into account the improvements, the parties acknowledgethat the Home was worth $605,000.00.

[58] In light of the Applicant’s bankruptcy, he testified that he was concerned about potentialfuture bankruptcy claims related to his work, and therefore title to the Home was in the name ofthe Respondent.

[59] The Applicant’s father, who had declared bankruptcy in the late 1990s and again around2004, confirmed that he had spoken to his son about title to the Home, and that “for liabilitypurposes” “we were not the owners of property”.

[60] The Respondent’s evidence was that, until 2010, she provided the lion’s share of themoney for the family and that her income, including the income from the unpaid taxes, was spentsupporting the family and to maintain the Home. This is corroborated by the income taxinformation summarized in Schedule A.

[61] The parties leased the basement apartment in 2012 in the Home for $1,350.00 per month.
The lease was in the name of both parties. The Respondent collected the rent post-separation. Itis not clear whether the apartment was rented until 2014 or 2016.
Facts Relevant to Support

[62]

In September 2014, the Respondent had a slip and fall accident at a No Frills that causedinjuries to her hips and back, precluding her from working. She has an outstanding lawsuit that isunresolved.

[63] After the accident, she was paid her salary by her employer until August 2016.

[64] The Respondent was on short term disability payments until December 2016 in theamount of $3,000.00 per month. As of January 2017, she became eligible for long-term disabilitypayments in the amount of $3,000.00 per month, non-taxable.

[65] In January 2017, the Respondent amended her pleading to claim spousal support.
Facts Relevant to the Unjust Enrichment Claim

[66] Most of the important facts about the work performed by the Applicant and the history ofthe marriage are not in dispute.

[67] The Applicant gave detailed evidence about his work on the Home. He is understandablyproud of the improvements he made to the Home during the marriage. He kept photos of thework as part of his portfolio for potential future customers. The extent and quality of the work isconfirmed in the numerous photos. I accept his evidence about the work that was performed andthe quality of that work.

[57] As required by the terms of the Loan, title was registered in the name of the Respondent.

9

[68] I accept the evidence of the Applicant as to the work he did on the Home, which iscorroborated by the photos as well as the evidence of the Respondent and the Applicant’s father.

[69] There was little independent evidence called by either party to corroborate their versionof events on the contested factual issues.

[70] The four contested factual issues are:
(a) whether, prior to his full-time employment in 2010, the Applicantcontributed his earnings to the Respondent’s account to be used for familypurposes;
(b) whether the Applicant knew of the Revenue Canada debt prior to the end of2009 or before the Home was purchased;
(c) the extent of the Applicant’s use of drugs and alcohol during the marriage;and
(d) the Respondent’s health situation prior to separation. (I will review this issuewhen I consider the entitlement to spousal support).
Credibility and Reliability of the Evidence of the Parties

[71] Cross-examination of the Applicant by the Respondent was very awkward. TheRespondent’s questions at times were either unclear or speeches rather than questions. Once theRespondent understood that she could put to the witness her view of the evidence, matters wentmore smoothly.

[72] The Applicant was quiet and controlled in the courtroom. He was careful with hisanswers. His negative attitude and disdain for the Respondent was palpable. During crossexamination, the Applicant flat out denied some of the Respondent’s assertions, but many of hisanswers were that he “could not recall”. It appears that he either had a poor memory or declinedto answer some difficult questions. He was a careful, well-prepared witness.

[73] By way of contrast, the Respondent’s evidence, both in chief and in cross-examination,was spontaneous, unpredictable, at times highly relevant, and at times not relevant at all to thematters in issue. She was passionate about describing her work and the pride and importance inher role in the First Nations community. She held a responsible, policy-oriented position.

[74] At trial, the Respondent had significant medical problems and was taking considerablemedication for her condition.

[75] Almost as soon as the trial commenced, the Respondent requested permission to lie onthe floor to hear and to give her evidence as she was in considerable pain. I could not permit thisas I could not see her and she could not see the witness. On the second day of the trial, the staff

Contested Factual Issues

10
were able to find a solution by renting a reclinable remote-controlled chair for the week. TheRespondent spent much of the time during the trial in a reclined position.

document from Dr. Al-Rawi, a sports medicine specialist who is one of her treating physicians,confirmed the significant health issues of the Respondent as at September 2016:
I have been following Corena Debassige for her hip and back injury since heraccident in September 2014. I initially saw her on October 16, 2014. Ds.
Debassige has now been referred to another surgical opinion as she has failed allother forms of conservative treatment.
Ms. Debassige is currently on a number of medications, including narcoticmedication, to control her pain as the physical therapy is not providing sustainedrelief. The doses have recently been increased due to ongoing and worseningsymptoms. Due to the potential side effects of these medications, including butnot limited to drowsiness, short term memory loss, dry mouth, blurry vision andheadaches, I believe she is not able to participate in any legal or court dates in thenear future. Due to her pain also, she is incapable of sitting and standing for longtimes which will also affect her court appearances.

[77] Counsel for the Applicant objected to the admissibility of this document. I allowed thedocument to be admitted into evidence. Dr. Al-Rawi is a treating physician who is able toexplain the Respondent’s condition and the medication that she is taking. It is admissible andrelevant. I note that the Respondent did not ask for an adjournment and both parties appeared tobe clearly anxious to have this matter finalized.

[78] The list of medications that the Respondent was taking on a daily basis was filed as anexhibit.

[79] The Respondent’s participation during the trial was inconsistent. At times she wasfocused, appropriate, capable of responding and participating, and quite energetic. At othertimes, she was having trouble with her memory, was unfocused, showing signs of fatigue, and attimes was almost slurring her words. The inconsistency in the demeanor of the Respondentappeared to be due largely to the effect of the medication.

[80] The Respondent is clearly intelligent and motivated. During the last five years of themarriage, she attended Trent University on Tuesdays and Thursdays each week, taking twocourses a year to complete her degree. This was accommodated by her employer as she was stillearning income for full-time employment during these years. On Tuesdays and Thursdays, sherose at 5:00a.m., travelled to Peterborough for her courses, and returned in the afternoon toprepare dinner for the family. She studied at night after the children had gone to bed. Shecompleted her biology degree in 2013, the year following the separation.

[81] Presently, the Respondent’s historic memory for detail of incidents and specifics of whathappened during the marriage appears far superior to the Applicant’s rather vague responses of

[76] As the trial progressed, I had an opportunity to review the documents filed as exhibits. A

11
“I don’t recall”. The Respondent’s capacity and focus, however, waxed and waned. She wouldoften forget where she was in either the questions she was asking, or the evidence that she wasgiving, probably due to the medications.

with respect to confirming facts about the history of the marriage.
Financial Contribution of the Applicant to the Marriage and to the Home

[83] The Respondent acknowledged that, after November 2010, the Applicant’s pay wasdeposited into the account in her name used for family purposes, but testified that, prior to thattime, the Applicant did not make such deposits.

[84] The Applicant testified that he gave his earnings to the Respondent to deposit in her bankaccount from 1997 to November 2010.

[85] The Applicant had not requested the banking documentation of the Respondent duringthe marriage to confirm his evidence, and did not file any of his bank documentation during themarriage. The Respondent, self-represented, has been compliant with any requests made.

[86] The Respondent testified that, particularly during the 2009 and 2010 period when theApplicant was in receipt of the disability earnings, he treated his earnings as largely his own andrefused to deposit these payments into the Respondent’s account. She testified that he boughtluxury items for himself (for example, a motorcycle) and various items for the children,including, for example, an expensive remote toy car that the Respondent testified they could illafford. She testified that, until the end of 2010, deposits from her earnings generally looked afterthe day to day expenses.

[87] After the bankruptcy, in 2005 to 2009, the Applicant went into business with a partner,and then on his own.

[88] For the reasons that I will outline more fully in the assessment of the unjust enrichmentclaim, I find that the Respondent contributed her earnings and provided steady income to thefamily and to the Home until November 2010. The Respondent managed the family financesfrom her account. She was very concerned about the family budget and testified that theRespondent got frustrated as she was too frugal.

[89] I accept the evidence of the Respondent that the Applicant did not deposit his earnings to

the Respondent’s account prior to November 2010. I find that the Applicant’s earnings were usedto buy more of the discretionary items for himself and the family and to fund his business from2005 until November 2010.
Beginning in November 2010, the Applicant obtained steadyemployment as a property manager and contributed his earnings to the operating account in thename of the Respondent in an amount somewhat greater than the Respondent’s earnings.
Was the Applicant Aware of the Revenue Canada Debt?

[82] In spite of these limitations, I found her to be a credible and generally reliable witness

12

[90] An issue is whether the Applicant knew of the ever-increasing Revenue Canada debt

[91] He further testified that, had he known of the debt, the Respondent would not havepurchased the Home and the family would have simply continued renting.

[92] The Respondent testified that the Applicant was well aware of the Revenue Canada debtthroughout the marriage, the test case litigation, and that the family was spending her grossincome, including the allocation for taxes.

[93] Prior to the marriage, the Respondent had saved her tax money in a separate accountpending the court challenge. However, this money put aside was used to pay for the parties’
wedding. She testified that the Applicant paid for the ring and she paid for the rest, including thehoneymoon. I find that the Applicant must have been aware of this tax situation before theparties married.

[94] During the marriage, the family used the unpaid tax money from 1997 to 2012 for livingexpenses and for improvements to the Home after its acquisition. There is no allegation by theApplicant that the tax funds were used for anything except family expenses or for the Home.

[95] The Respondent is a voluble, spontaneous, forthright communicator. That she would hidethis significant potential debt from the Applicant makes no sense whatsoever. The tax challengewas an important issue for the strained finances of this family. The parties used the tax money tomake ends meet.

[96] I find that the Applicant knew of the ever-increasing potential Revenue Canada debtthroughout the marriage and well prior to the end of 2009.
The Applicant’s use of Drugs and Alcohol

[97] A contested factual issue was the degree of the Applicant’s consumption of drugs andalcohol and the extent to which it is relevant to his financial contributions over the years.

[98] The Respondent alleges in her pleadings and in her evidence that the Applicant had asignificant problem with drugs and alcohol during the marriage, which consumed money andcreated financial and emotional instability.

[99] Initially, the Applicant did not address the issue in his evidence, nor was he crossexamined on this. When it was obvious that this was a contested issue, clearly addressed in thepleadings, and to be addressed in the Respondent’s evidence, the Applicant was recalled toprovide both evidence in chief and cross-examination on this issue.

prior to the acquisition of the Home. The Applicant testified that he knew of the debt in late 2009
or 2010 when he saw a document from Revenue Canada seeking to collect some $200,000.00 inunpaid taxes.

13

[100] The Applicant testified that he did not have a “serious substance abuse” problem. He

[101] The Respondent described a serious intermittent dependence during a lengthy period oftime with both drugs and alcohol. She testified that the Applicant was a member of AA at theRichmond Hill location for over five years and that he had the role of the librarian for theorganization. She testified that she regularly attended the open meetings with him. She testifiedthat the Applicant was a functioning alcoholic and that he consumed many drugs includingcocaine. She testified that his use was primarily on weekends and that it was sporadic. He wouldwork for periods then fall into difficulties again. She described helping him with painful detoxsituations. She described the Applicant using alcohol and drugs in the garage in the evenings tohide the consumption from the children. She was not cross-examined on this evidence, whichpainted a very different picture of use of drugs and alcohol than the evidence of the Applicant.

[102] I do not accept the evidence of the Applicant that it was the Respondent who had the drugproblem. I accept the evidence of the Respondent that any “partying” early in the marriageabruptly stopped when she had back-to-back pregnancies in 1998 and 1999. The Respondentacknowledged that she used marijuana during the marriage, but that it did not impact on herability to work full-time throughout the marriage except for two brief maternity leaves. She alsopursued two university courses a year for the last five years of the marriage, while working fulltime and managing the Home.

[103] I accept the evidence of the Respondent that the consumption by the Applicant of drugsand alcohol was a problem in the marriage, creating emotional instability and adding to thefinancial insecurity of the family.

[104] It is not necessary for the analysis to make detailed findings on this issue. It appears clearthat since November 2010 the Applicant has enjoyed stable employment and stable income.
Consumption by the Applicant is not a present issue.
Legal Principles of Unjust Enrichment

[105] I outline the legal principles of unjust enrichment before considering the facts in thiscase.

[106] The Applicant bears the onus of proving the unjust enrichment claim.

[107] Courts are required to determine questions of beneficial ownership of assets at the firststage of the NFP analysis. The Court of Appeal has confirmed that, “[b]efore property can beequalized under the Family Law Act, a court must first determine the ‘net family property’ ofeach spouse. This exercise requires first that all questions of title be settled”: Martin v. Sansome,2014 ONCA 14, 118 O.R. (3d) 522, at para. 47; see also McNamee v. McNamee, 2011 ONCA

acknowledged recreational weekend use of marijuana and cocaine. The Respondent suggestedthat it was the Respondent, not he, who consumed drugs to excess. He acknowledged that he wasbriefly a member of AA, but for a short period of time.

14
533, 106 O.R. (3d) 401, at para. 66. Under s. 10(1) of the FLA, a court can determine questionsof “ownership or right to possession of particular property” between spouses.

[109] I echo the views of Hoy A.C.J. in Martin, at para. 67, that it is a “rare” case whenconstructive trusts should be imposed to give a proprietary interest in property when the partiesare married. Generally, the statutory scheme of the FLA should address questions of unjustenrichment in the context of marriage.

[110] The Applicant argues that he is entitled to a 50% beneficial interest in the matrimonialhome by way of a constructive trust. He submits that this would remedy the Respondent’s unjustenrichment from the labour and money he contributed. Alternatively, counsel for the Applicantargues I can craft an appropriate remedy with a lesser beneficial interest to take into account theApplicant’s contribution.

[111] Unjust enrichment has been clarified by the Supreme Court decision in Kerr v. Baranow,2011 SCC 10, 328 D.L.R. (4th) 577. Justice Cromwell, at para. 32, confirms that an unjustenrichment claim requires “three elements: an enrichment of or benefit to the defendant, acorresponding deprivation of the plaintiff, and the absence of a juristic reason for theenrichment”.

[112] I summarize Cromwell J.’s analysis of each element:
(a)

First, for enrichment or benefit to the defendant, the defendant must havereceived and retained a tangible benefit from the plaintiff that “can berestored to the plaintiff in specie or by money.” The contribution or benefitmay include improvement of property: Sorochan v. Sorochan, [1986] 2
S.C.R. 38, at para. 31. This contribution typically takes the form of labour orcapital.

(b)

Second, for corresponding deprivation, the plaintiff must show “not simplythat the defendant has been enriched, but also that the enrichmentcorresponds to a deprivation which the plaintiff has suffered”: Kerr v.
Baranow, at para. 39. Courts have also described this as a requirement thatthere be a “direct nexus” between the plaintiff’s deprivation and thedefendant’s enrichment: see e.g. Singer v. Schering-Plough Canada Inc.,2010 ONSC 42, 87 C.P.C. (6th) 276, at para. 111.

(c)

Third, for absence of juristic reason, it must be the case “that there is noreason in law or justice for the defendant's retention of the benefit conferredby the plaintiff, making its retention ‘unjust’ in the circumstances of thecase”: Kerr v. Baranow, at para. 40.

[113] As Cromwell J. explains, at para. 37 of Kerr v. Baranow, “[t]he Court has taken astraightforward economic approach to the first two elements – enrichment and corresponding

[108] I begin the outline of the law with a caution.

15
deprivation. Accordingly, other considerations, such as moral and policy questions, areappropriately dealt with at the juristic reason stage of the analysis”.
support of the Applicant’s claim. The joint family venture analysis would have no application tothe present case. As Cromwell J. explained in Kerr v. Baranow, at para. 83, there is a “legislativepresumption that married partners are engaged in a joint family venture.” It is only necessary toengage in the joint family venture analysis when the “legislative presumption” of the FLA doesnot apply. The parties here are married partners, not common law partners, so the FLA appliesand the joint family venture analysis would be redundant.

[115] The Court must first consider whether any unjust enrichment can be remedied by amonetary remedy. Counsel argues that due to the significant debts of the Respondent, payment ofmoney is not a viable option. If I had concluded there was merit to the Applicant’s claim, I
would have explored in more detail with evidence of the current value of the home, and thecurrent debts of the Respondent with interest, whether a monetary award was viable.
Analysis and Conclusions for Unjust Enrichment

[116] I conclude that the Applicant is unable to make out a claim for unjust enrichment.
Although the first element of unjust enrichment has been proved: receipt of a tangible benefit, I
conclude for reasons to follow that the second and third requirements cannot be met.
Element 1: Receipt of a Tangible Benefit

[117] The Applicant estimates that the value of the labour and materials that he and his fathercontributed was $47,000.00 to $55,000.00 total. The Applicant gave opinion evidence that thiscontribution increased the value of the Home by $100,000.00. There was no expert evidence onthis point. For the purpose of this analysis, I accept these estimates, which, though perhapsgenerous, appear in the range of reasonable.

[118] The Applicant alleges that he also made financial contributions for the carrying costs ofthe Home. I will assess this issue when I consider the other elements of unjust enrichment.

[119] I accept that the Applicant did significant labour on the Home after its acquisition, asdocumented in his exhibits and in his evidence. The Respondent confirmed that the Applicantwas very competent and that he did “beautiful” work on the Home. This is borne out by thephotos.

[120] The Applicant’s father also contributed labour for some of the improvements, includingthe replacement of sagging joists, the wiring, and the installation of the furnace. In his evidence,he made it clear that this contribution was to the family, not just to the Applicant. I estimate,based upon the father’s evidence, that the father’s contribution of work to the Home totals
$9,000.00. He and his wife also gave the generous gift to the family of $5,000.00 to allow themto finish the basement apartment so that it could be rented to generate income for the family.

[114] Counsel for the Applicant concedes that she is not relying upon a joint family venture in

16
“We presented it to them together”. Again, this gift was to both of the parties, not just theApplicant.

Applicant as if it was his contribution to the Home. It is included in his estimate of time andmaterials of $47,000 to $55,000.

[122] Without taking into account the father’s contribution (which was clearly to benefit bothparties and the family), the Applicant’s contributions in time and materials using his estimates istherefore between $38,000 and $46,000, which had an augmented effect on the fair market valueof the Home. This is a benefit to the Respondent, meeting the first branch of the test for unjustenrichment.

[123] There is no allegation that the Applicant made any improvements to the Home postseparation. He did pay interest on the joint line of credit of the parties that predated theacquisition of the Home and had been used for family expenses. The rental income from theapartment did help with the carrying costs for some time post-separation.

[124] I conclude that the contribution by the Applicant meets the first element of unjustenrichment. I conclude that the Applicant has proved that the Respondent received and retained atangible benefit from the Applicant as the Home was registered in her name.

[125] I turn to consider the other two required elements for unjust enrichment.
Element 2: Deprivation

[126] The Applicant must prove a corresponding deprivation. To prove this, the plaintiff mustshow “not simply that the defendant has been enriched, but also that the enrichment correspondsto a deprivation which the plaintiff has suffered”: Kerr v. Baranow, at para. 39. Courts have alsodescribed this as a requirement that there be a “direct nexus” between the plaintiff’s deprivationand the defendant’s enrichment: see e.g. Singer v. Schering-Plough Canada Inc., 2010 ONSC
42, 87 C.P.C. (6th) 276, at para. 111.

[127] Kerr v. Baranow, at para. 37, confirms that the Court should take a straightforwardeconomic analysis for the first two elements of unjust enrichment.

[128] I conclude that the evidence of the Applicant, at its highest, does not support a finding ofa deprivation.

[129] To assess the question of deprivation, using a purely economic analysis, I must look notonly at the circumstances and contributions of the Applicant, but also those of the Respondent.
The approach argued by the Applicant is one-sided, and only focuses on the contribution of theApplicant and ignores the significant contribution of the Respondent to the family and to theHome.

[121] This work and financial contribution made by the Applicant’s father is treated by the

17

[130] The evidence of both parties confirms that, throughout the marriage until the purchase of

[131] The parties used the gross taxable income of the Respondent throughout the marriage tolive on and to acquire the Home, resulting in the significant Revenue Canada debt at separation.
As outlined previously in these reasons, I accept the evidence of the Respondent that theApplicant was well aware of this accruing debt and the Respondent’s challenge as to whether ornot her income earned was taxable.

[132] The onus is on the Applicant to prove the elements of unjust enrichment. The Respondentwas unrepresented. It would have been helpful to have the bank accounts of financialcontribution as alleged by the Applicant.

[133] The November 2012 bank statement for the account in the Respondent’s name used forfamily purposes was the only bank record filed as an exhibit. It confirmed the undisputed factthat, for the month the parties separated, that the Applicant’s pay check was deposited to theaccount.

[134] During argument, counsel for the Applicant argued that I should draw an adverseinference against the Respondent on this issue, as she did not provide her historic bankdocuments. She testified that she did not have the documents to file as the Applicant shreddedmany documents, including her bank documents prior to the separation. These documents werenot requested by the Applicant. The Respondent has been compliant with all requests fordisclosure made by the counsel for the Applicant.

[135] Based upon the evidence before me, I find that, after the acquisition of the Home anduntil late 2010, the Applicant made some contribution to the expenses of the family and thematerials for the improvement to the Home, but that the lion’s share of the financial contributioncame from the Respondent, including spending the allocation for unpaid income taxes.

[136] For the cost of materials and improvements to the Home, I accept the evidence of theRespondent that, except for amounts less than $100, these funds were paid for by the Respondentfrom her account or on the credit cards in her name, as she was exempt from paying the GST onpurchases.

[137] To assess deprivation, the debts accrued by the parties for the Home existing atseparation should be considered. They were unequal.

[138] The Respondent accrued significant credit card debts in her name for materials for theHome in the amount of approximately $30,000.00. ($11,601.25, $6,297.69 and $11,991.27). Shewas able to get the taxes reimbursed due to her native status and, therefore, all major purchases

the home, they lived a day-to-day, rather precarious financial existence, spending everythingthey earned and more. They lived in rental accommodation from 1997 to 2009, when the Homewas purchased. The joint line of credit of $30,000.00 was at its maximum. The parties had nosavings.

18
were put on these credit cards. These debts existed at separation and today. By way of contrast,the Applicant’s credit card debts at separation were $3,861.18.

acquisition of the Home by doing clean up and looking after the children. I accept her evidencethat she did most of the meal preparation.

[140] I find in these factual circumstances, taking a straightforward economic approach, thatthe Applicant did not suffer a deprivation. He did contribute work and some funding to theHome. His contribution was not disproportionate to the significant contribution of theRespondent.

[141] The full value of the Home, taking into account improvements made by the Applicant, isincluded in the value of the Respondent’s net family property at separation. Unfortunately, theRespondent’s debts, including the Revenue Canada debt accrued to purchase the Home and usedfor family purposes, overwhelm and exceed the improved value of the Home, leaving theRespondent in a net negative financial position.

[142] I conclude that, on the facts of this case, the Applicant has not met the onus of proof ofshowing deprivation.
Element 3: Absence of Juristic Reason

[143] If I am wrong in my conclusion that the Applicant did not suffer a deprivation, I turn toconsider the third element of unjust enrichment. The Applicant must prove the absence of juristicreason to allow the claim: that there is no reason in law or justice for the defendant's retention ofthe benefit conferred by the plaintiff.

[144] Kerr v. Baranow, at para. 31, confirms that “at the heart of the doctrine of unjustenrichment lies the notion of restoring a benefit which justice does not permit one to retain.”

[145] Justice Cromwell in Kerr v. Baranow adopts the test for absence of juristic reasonoutlined in Garland v. Consumers' Gas Co., 2004 SCC 25, 237 D.L.R. (4th) 385. There is a twostep analysis for this third element with a shifting burden of proof outlined by Cromwell J., atpara 43:
In Garland, the Court set out a two-step analysis for the absence of juristic reason.
It is important to remember that what prompted this development was to ensurethat the juristic reason analysis was not "purely subjective", thereby building intothe unjust enrichment analysis an unacceptable "immeasureable judicialdiscretion" that would permit "case by case 'palm tree' justice": Garland, at para.
40. The first step of the juristic reason analysis applies the established categoriesof juristic reasons; in their absence, the second step permits consideration of thereasonable expectations of the parties and public policy considerations to assesswhether recovery should be denied.

[139] The Applicant also concedes that the Respondent contributed to the family after the

19
[Emphasis added.]
juristic reasons to deny recovery do not apply, which include “other valid common law, equitableor statutory obligations”. If the Applicant meets the primary burden that the case falls outside theexisting recognized categories, then the Respondent may rebut the finding in the residualdefence. The Court can look at all of the circumstances. Policy, and the legitimate expectationsof the parties, feature in this phase of the analysis.

[147] There are few cases providing guidance how this test is to be applied as between marriedparties.

[148] I find that the Applicant has failed to prove absence of juristic reason to allow the claimfor two reasons: first, the circumstances in which the Home was registered in the name of theRespondent, and second, the Respondent’s significant debt was used to acquire and maintain theHome.

[146] The Applicant bears the initial onus of proof to show that the established categories of

20
Deliberate Decision to Purchase Home in Respondent’s Name to Protect from Creditors

was made to protect him from future creditor claims or in case of bankruptcy. His father, whohas twice declared bankruptcy, also testified that he too registered any home in his wife’s nameto protect it from potential claims from his creditors. He counselled his son to take the samesteps. In his words, “we were not the owners of the property”.

[150] Placing a property in the name of a spouse is quite a usual practice to creditor proof anasset. However, it flies in the face of equity to then allow a person to advance a beneficialinterest in property when it suits his purpose, but to deny an interest in property to prevent theclaims of creditors. The law is clear that “unjust enrichment is an equitable doctrine and that aplaintiff seeking a remedy for it must come to the court with clean hands”: Taylor v. Guindon,

[2005] O.J. No. 3110, at para. 54 (Ont. S.C.).
Failure to Consider Unjust Enrichment of Home in the Context of the Debt

[151] In the unjust enrichment claim, the Applicant seeks to take into account the only assetaccumulated in the marriage: the Home, but does not acknowledge that he is responsible for halfof the debt to Revenue Canada. That debt, from 2008 to 2012 supported the acquisition andimprovements to the Home.

[152] The Applicant seeks to pick and choose amongst legal principles to support his claim.
The Applicant attempts to argue the best of trust principles to advance a trust claim to abeneficial interest in the Home, coupled with case law confirming that negative debt is not to beequalized in a division of property under the FLA.

[153] His position is that he is not responsible for the Revenue Canada debt in theRespondent’s name, although the unpaid taxes were used over the years for the benefit of thefamily and to maintain and improve the Home. Counsel for the Applicant relies upon the caselaw confirming in the NFP calculation that negative debts at separation are not to be equalized:
see von Czieslik v. Ayuso, 2007 ONCA 305, 86 O.R. (3d) 88, at para. 58.

[154] Applying equitable principles demands fairness and assessment of the entire context.
Assessing a claim to entitlement to an asset without considering a corresponding debt related toits acquisition and maintenance is not fair and offends established principles underpinningequitable remedies.
Residual Defence

[155] If I am incorrect in my analysis and the Applicant has met the onus of proving the threerequirements for unjust enrichment, I would find that, on the facts of this case, the Respondenthas nonetheless met the secondary burden of proof of establishing a residual defence. Looking toall of the circumstances of the transaction, and the relationship between the parties, the unjustenrichment claim should fail for moral and policy-based reasons.

[149] The Applicant confirmed that the decision to have the Respondent purchase the home

21

[156] The improved value of the Home, taking into account the contributions of the Applicant,

[157] The Applicant did not contribute to any improvements to the Home post separation.

[158] The lease prepared by the Applicant was in the name of both parties, although theRespondent was the registered owner of the Home. The Respondent received the rent in theamount of $1,350 per month from the apartment post separation. The rent helped defray themortgage expenses for a period of time post separation. This fact is not sufficient to establish atrust claim post separation.

[159] As I have outlined, in the “duelling quantum meruit” claims1, it is clear that theRespondent contributed significantly to the acquisition and improvements to the Home. TheRespondent included the agreed upon value of the improved Home at separation of $605,000.00
in her NFP. This value takes into account the Applicant’s contribution by way of labour as wellas his financial contribution to the Home.

[160] The parties were only able to acquire the Home because the Respondent qualified for theLoan and was working and earning a stable salary to qualify for the mortgage. The Applicantmade a deliberate decision not to be on title. The retained income from the Respondent’s unpaidtaxes assisted both parties in contributing to their day-to-day living expenses and to paying themortgage on the Home. The fact that negative NFPs are not equalized shields the Applicant fromtaking on half of the Respondent’s debt, which benefitted both of them.

[161] On policy grounds, it would be inappropriate for the court to impose a constructive trust.
Unjust enrichment is intended to rectify injustice. The NFP calculation at separation of theApplicant is (-$10,959.49). The Respondent’s NFP is (-$63,070.07) with 100% of the Homeregistered as her asset. If the Applicant is declared to be a 50% owner of the Home, he would bein a positive net asset position at separation, ($52,833.00) with the Respondent in a significantnegative debt position (-$137,910.49).

[162] I find that there is a juristic reason to deny the claim as the result proposed by theApplicant, having regard to the assets and the debt at separation is clearly and manifestly unjust.
Application of the FLA to Address Unjust Enrichment in Marriage

[163] I have found that there was no unjust enrichment, and hence the following comments areobiter.

1

Kerr v. Baranow, at para. 48.

is included in the NFP of the Respondent at the date of separation. There is no evidence beforeme as to the current value of the Home, but inevitably its value has increased. So too have theRespondent’s debts, including interest on debts since separation.

22

[164] In cases where an unjust enrichment is proved, Hoy A.C.J. in Martin confirms thatcaution is warranted in applying the constructive trust remedy in the context of married parties. Itis a remedy of last resort.

consider whether a monetary remedy is appropriate. Martin is clear that if there is unjustenrichment between married spouses, the Court should consider whether an adequate monetaryremedy can be provided by the operation of the FLA’s equalization provisions, including, “wherenecessary” by unequally dividing NFPs under s. 5(6) of the FLA.

[166] The circumstances to justify meeting the stringent test of unconscionability in section5(6) of the FLA for an unequal division of property must “shock the conscience of the court”: seeSerra v. Serra, 2009 ONCA 105, 93 O.R. (3d) 161, at para. 47.

[167] There are no facts in this case that would justify invoking section 5(6) of the FLA.

[168] A remedy may be cautiously crafted to remedy the unjust enrichment by a monetaryamount if the provisions of the FLA are not adequate. Only if all these sequential steps have beenassessed as inadequate to address an unjust enrichment is the remedy of imposition of abeneficial interest in property is to be considered.

[169] Associate Chief Justice Hoy found in Martin that the unjust enrichment was adequatelycompensated by the NFP payment. She stated, at para. 67, that she left “for another day thequestion of what should be done in those rare cases where monetary damages for unjustenrichment arising out of marriage cannot be adequately addressed by the equalizationprovisions of the FLA [Emphasis added]”.

[170] Family law cases for married couples are difficult and draining. The provisions of theFLA are clear and provide consistency and predictability for litigants. Adding on the layer of
“duelling quantum meruit” claims to the legislative scheme creates uncertainly, confusion, costlytrials, and unpredictability.

[171] Constructive trust claims such as in this case require a view of the total picture ofcontributions in a marriage to assess the context of whether the elements of unjust enrichmenthave been met.

[172] I conclude that, even if the elements of unjust enrichment had been made out, this is not arare case warranting a remedy other than the division of property in the NFP. Trust claims arenot to be routinely advanced between married parties and are limited to cases of clear inequitythat shocks the conscience of the court requiring intervention.

[173] I agree with the concerns expressed by McKelvey J. in Straub v. Straub, 2012 ONSC
3819, 32 R.F.L. (7th) 415 and his confirmation of the limited availability of constructive trustclaims between married parties.

[165] According to Kerr, where unjust enrichment has been made out, the Court should first

23

[174] In Straub, the husband claimed an interest in the increased value of the home post

In my view, the statutory framework for equalization should be applied routinely,and it will be a rare case where a court will apply the constructive trust doctrinesin situations which are governed by the statutory framework. There should be ahigh threshold before departing from the statutory guidelines. I also feel it issignificant that the provisions of the Family Law Act have provisions which allowfor an unequal distribution in cases where an equal distribution would beunreasonable. This reinforces my view that the law relating to constructive trustshas little relevance in cases which are governed by the statutory framework.
[Emphasis added.]

[175] Applying the FLA, in the agreed upon NFP for the Respondent at separation is
(-$63,070.07). In this calculation, includes the Home is her asset, as well as all her debts,including the Revenue Canada debt. There is no issue that all these debts must be paid.

[176] The Applicant’s agreed upon NFP in at separation, with the Home registered as an assetof the Respondent’s, is also less than zero (-$10,959.49).

[177] The Applicant advances a trust/unjust enrichment claim for a 50% interest in the Homebased upon his contribution and that of his father for labour to improvements in the Home. If theApplicant’s claim is successful, his NFP at separation is $106,666.00 and he would be requiredto pay the Respondent $52,833.00. This would leave him in a positive asset position of
$52,833.00.

[178] If the Applicant’s trust claim succeeds and he is to be a 50% beneficial owner of theHome at separation, the Respondent would be in a significantly worse negative NFP position of
(-$137,910.49) after taking into account the $52,833.00 notionally payable by the Husband.
Counsel for the Applicant argues that this result is not unfair because, applying the case lawunder the FLA, any negative net worth is not to be equalized.

[179] This is not the rare case referenced by Hoy A.C.J in Martin, as suggested by counsel forthe Applicant. There should be a high threshold before departing from the statutory guidelines ofthe FLA for married couples.

[180] There is no unjust enrichment and a constructive trust claim should not be superimposedto trump the provisions of the FLA.

[181] Caution should be exercised in advancing trust claims when the parties are married. Thecosts and complexity of such claims flies in the face of the purpose of the FLA to provide clear,

separation and the wife sought entitlement to the increased value of the husband’s portfolio postseparation. Both claims were dismissed. Justice McKelvey found that neither party had made anycontribution post separation to the assets held by the other. He confirmed, at para. 109, that it is arare case where trust claims apply between married spouses governed by the FLA:

24
predictable rules for the division of property after married parties separate. The cost andcomplexity is amply illustrated in this modest case. The Applicant’s claim based upon unjustenrichment and constructive trust is dismissed.

credit. This debt predated the acquisition of the Home. The Respondent should repay theApplicant for half of these debt payments made on her behalf.
Spousal Support Claim of Respondent

[183] The Respondent has the burden of proving entitlement and need in her claim for support.

[184] The Applicant argues that, as the slip and fall accident giving rise to need for supporttook place well after the separation of the parties, he is not responsible to pay spousal support.
The amendment to the pleadings claiming support was over four years post separation.

[185] The Respondent argues that although she did not contemplate the need for spousalsupport at separation, the medical problems preventing her from working now began during themarriage and crystalized with the slip and fall, which took place 22 months after the separation.
The accident exacerbated a pre-existing condition. She did not amend her pleading to include aclaim for support while she was in receipt of her salary, although not working. It was only afterefforts at rehabilitation failed, and she was eligible for disability payments, that the claim forsupport was advanced.

[186] The parties are still married and I grant the divorce claimed by both parties in theirpleadings.

[187] The claim for spousal support is made pursuant to section 15.2(4) of the Divorce Act,R.S.C. 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp.). In deciding whether to grant a spousal support order, a court musttake into account the following factors under section 15.2(4):
(4) In making an order under subsection (1) or an interim order under subsection
(2), the court shall take into consideration the condition, means, needs and othercircumstances of each spouse, including
(a) the length of time the spouses cohabited;
(b) the functions performed by each spouse during cohabitation; and
(c) any order, agreement or arrangement relating to support of either spouse.

[188] The objectives of spousal support orders are listed at section 15.2(6) of the Divorce Act:
An order made under subsection (1) or an interim order under subsection (2) thatprovides for the support of a spouse should

[182] The Applicant has made interest payments on the joint debt of the parties for their line of

25

(b) apportion between the spouses any financial consequences arising fromthe care of any child of the marriage over and above any obligation forthe support of any child of the marriage;
(c) relieve any economic hardship of the spouses arising from thebreakdown of the marriage; and
(d) in so far as practicable, promote the economic self-sufficiency of eachspouse within a reasonable period of time.
Facts Relevant to Claim for Support

[189] The parties separated in November 2012 after a fifteen-year marriage with two teenagedependent children. The slip and fall accident precipitating the claim for spousal supportoccurred in September 2014, approximately 22 months after separation. At the time of theaccident, the parties were still involved in litigation. The settlement with respect to the childrenwas reached in March 2014 with the assistance of input from the Office of the Children’s Lawyermonths before the accident. One child resided with each party.

[190] Until the Revenue Canada debt was finalized in April 2016 when leave to appeal to theSupreme Court of Canada was denied, it was difficult to resolve the financial issues between theparties.

[191] The litigation for the slip and fall is outstanding. The Respondent seeks compensation forloss of income in that lawsuit as well as other relief. An issue in the litigation that arose atmediation is whether the Respondent had a pre-existing medical condition.

[192] The Respondent testified that at the time of separation, she did not foresee claimingspousal support as she had been proudly financially independent throughout the marriage. Shehad provided financial security to the family when the Applicant’s income and circumstanceswere unpredictable. She had the dream of finishing her science degree and pursuing her studiesas a medical doctor. Due to her native status, the costs of medical school would be covered. Afterthe slip and fall, her employer kept her on full salary for two years.

[193] It was only in early 2017 after she was discharged from her employment and it wasuncertain whether she would qualify for long-term disability that the Applicant amended herclaim to seek spousal support.

[194] The case law supports that entitlement to support may depend on whether the genesis ofthe problem giving rise to the need for support existed during the marriage.

[195] The Respondent pleaded and testified that she had pre-existing problems during themarriage, including allegations of physical abuse, contributing to her present medical problems.

(a) recognize any economic advantages or disadvantages to the spousesarising from the marriage or its breakdown;

26
The entire medical file of her family doctor Dr. Wong was not in evidence, except one medicalrecord dated September 30, 2010.

It is noteworthy that the Applicant called the police and the Respondent was arrested, chargedwith assault, and subject to bail conditions for allegedly trying to push the Applicant down thestairs.

[197] After this incident, on September 30, 2010, the Respondent went to see her family doctor.
Dr. Wong’s note confirms:
office visit, crying still, problem with husband, financial difficulty, agitation,decreased mood, husband grabbed right forearm, stepped on right foot, assaultedby husband, patient was arrested by police and charged for assault by police,fingerprinted, humiliated by police exam.
Social history, going to move to girlfriend's place place, move-in date October2010. Now, right shoulder pain, right hip pain.
Assessment depression situational crisis, multiple soft tissue injuries.
Plan, Valium not working, Percocet one tablet TID PRN, dispense 15, advise onlya limited amount now. Ativan 1 mg q.h.s. p.r.n., dispense six tablets only, 25
minutes supportive therapy, discussed coping situations and mechanisms, 12:30
PM to 1PM. No active suicidal ideation. Discussed crisis centres and if worse goto crisis Centre. Advised to return to clinic for follow up in one week.
[Emphasis added.]

[198] The letter of Cr. Craig Sokoluk on March 10, 2014 is to the family doctor for arheumatology consultation that occurred fourteen months after the separation, and six monthsbefore the slip and fall accident. Dr. Sokoluk confirms a long-term history of hip problemsdating back eight years:
Thank you for referring this 42-year-old woman for a rheumatology consultation.
She was evaluated March 6, 2014 for the problem of arthralgia.
The patient has been experiencing discomfort from her hips for at least eightyears. In the past she suffered a left-sided dislocation which was treatedconservatively with physiotherapy. She was assaulted four years ago and has hada worsening of her hip pain since that time. She currently reports pain from theanterior region as well as from the lumbar spine. Her pain worsens upon walking.
On occasions she has noticed a clicking sensation from the hips. She has tried anumber of NSAID’s, most recently Ibuprofen.

[196] There was one incident of a report of an assault by the Applicant on September 28, 2010.

27
She also reports discomfort from the bases of her thumbs.

Her past medical history is noteworthy for the aforementioned left hip dislocation,kidney stones, a cholecystectomy, plantor fasciitis, iron deficiency, bladderproblem and surgery for endometriosis.

Her family history was noteworthy for several members with arthritic conditions.
[Emphasis added.]

[199] The x-ray taken the day of the slip and fall confirms degenerative changes in the hipjoints as of September 2014, less than two years post separation.

[200] The Respondent had purchased mortgage insurance for Accidental Disability Benefits.
The insurer has had access to the entire medical file of the family doctor. The insurer has deniedcoverage as of November 2016. The letter from the Mortgage Protection Plan states that the:
reason for the denial of coverage was the pre-existing condition that had continued for yearsAccording to the Terms of your Insurance, you were advised that your coverage isfor Accidental Disability Benefits only.
Your coverage states; Disability Insurance is provided only for bodily harmresulting directly from an Accident. Accident means a sudden, unexpected,unforeseeable, unavoidable external event. Disability Insurance specificallyexcludes injuries or disabilities caused by sickness, illness, or disease.
The information on file from Dr. Wong indicates that your current disability isdue to chronic pain, syndrome and right hip labral tear. You had a slip onSeptember 26, 2014 which aggravated your pre-existing condition ofosteoarthritis of the hips and chronic back pain. You were also seen prior to theeffective date of coverage (March 1/14) for hip discomfort ongoing for a period of8 years due to degenerative osteoarthritis.
Since your chronic hip and back pain is due to a medical condition and not solelydue to an accidental injury, we are unable to consider benefits under thisCertificate of Insurance.
[Emphasis added.]

[201] These records confirm that the Respondent had a pre-existing medical condition presentduring the marriage of hip and back pain, that was exacerbated by the slip and fall injury. The

She does not have a history of psoriasis, inflammatory eye disease orinflammatory bowel disease. There are no further features suggestive of a diffuseconnective tissue disease process.

28
various pre-existing medical problems during the marriage did not impair the Respondent’sability to work and attend school.
2016, describes the Respondent’s current medical condition, and also confirms his view that, dueto degenerative changes in the hip joint, the only viable treatment for the Respondent is a hipreplacement.

[203] He describes in some detail the Respondent’s significant difficulties in her currentcondition:
She has had 1 year of physiotherapy for hip, back and lateral-sided leg pain. Shehas had Cortisone shots as I understand it, for what is thought to be bursitis and/orsciatica.
Currently, she is on narcotics by way of Hydromorphone, both short-acting andlong-acting preparations. These were prescribed by yourself. She takes Lyrica,Meloxicam. The latter she has some side effects. She has been off work for atleast a year now. She has opposite-sided left leg pain. She uses a wheeled walkerto ambulate.
On examination, she has pain overlying her entire right lower extremity, includingher thigh, her lower leg, her foot and ankle, as well as her hop. She describes backand leg pain. Both are equally disabling.
Her x-rays are telling. She has joint space narrowing medially, superiorly, andlaterally, consistent with some early arthritic changes. She has some osteopenia inand around the joint.
She smokes about a pack a day.
I think there are many reasons why this lady would be a poor operative candidateby way of labral repair. I know she has an MRI scan that demonstrates a labraltear, but I suspect this is on the basis of degenerative changes in the joint, whichare apparent on x-ray. I do not think she would do well with arthroscopic surgeryfor the reasons outlined above.
I would suggest that she see someone regarding a hip replacement, as I feel that isthe only way to give her a lasting and comprehensive answer to her ongoingdiscomfort and her disability.

[204] Presently the Respondent is on a waiting list for assessment for a hip replacement.

[202] The letter to Dr. Al-Rawi from Dr. Whelan, an ambulatory consultant, dated May 24,

29
Support Case Law

[205] The two leading Supreme Court decisions on spousal support are Moge v. Moge, [1992] 3

[206] In Moge, L’Hereux Dube J. wrote, at para. 48, that “[w]hat the Act requires is a fair andequitable distribution of resources to alleviate the economic consequences of marriage ormarriage breakdown for both spouses, regardless of gender.”

[207] In Bracklow, McLachlin J. (as she then was) commented, at para. 44, that “[i]t is not thebare fact of marriage, so much as the relationship that is established and the expectations thatmay reasonably flow from it that give rise to the obligation of support under the statutes.” Sheheld, at para. 15, “that the law recognizes three conceptual grounds for entitlement to spousalsupport: (1) compensatory; (2) contractual; and (3) non-compensatory.”

[208] It appears clear that the first two grounds do not apply in the present case. The noncompensatory ground encompasses factors such as need and means of the parties. JusticeMcLachlin commented, at para. 48 of Bracklow, that: “Divorce ends the marriage. Yet in somecircumstances the law may require that a healthy party continue to support a disabled party,absent contractual or compensatory entitlement. Justice and considerations of fairness maydemand no less.”

[209] There are few cases such as this, when a spouse is financially independent at the time ofseparation and need arises post-separation. The most helpful case dealing with this scenario isFyfe v. Jouppien, 2011 ONSC 5462, 10 R.F.L. (7th) 336. Justice Chappel observed, at para. 3,that neither Moge nor Bracklow specifically addresses the question of need arising postseparation.

[210] Justice Chappel provides a helpful review of the few cases addressing need arising postseparation. The cases are factually dependant. He outlines the principles that emerge from thevarious cases. The more recent case of Peters v. Peters, 2015 ONSC 4006, 64 R.F.L. (7th) 436
adds further principles.

[211] I summarize the relevant principles in assessing entitlement to support for circumstancesarising post separation drawing on the principles outlined in Fyfe v. Jouppien as well as Petersand considering the facts of this case:
(a)

The question is whether, taking into account all of the circumstances of theparticular case, and the objectives underlying a spousal support award it isreasonable on an objective analysis to expect the parties to continue to beresponsible for each other in the event of post separation need, and if so, forhow long.

(b)

Economic hardship in light of the new circumstances must be in thereasonable contemplation of the parties at the time of the breakdown of themarriage. Marriage is not a lifetime future guarantee for support.

S.C.R. 813 and Bracklow v. Bracklow, [1999] 1 S.C.R. 420.

(c)

The starting point is whether there is evidence during the period prior toseparation to rebut the presumption of mutuality and interdependencearising from the marriage relationship itself. If there is not, it may bereasonable to expect that the parties will support each other for a reasonableperiod of time for need arising post-separation.

(d)

The passage of time may, or may not be an important consideration inassessing entitlement.

(e)

Time will be less important if the parties have not made a clean break andtheir relationship continues to be characterized by mutuality andinterdependence. In such circumstances, the conclusion may be that theexpectation of mutual support and dependency arising from the marriagerelationship has continued.

(f)

The presence of ongoing shared responsibility for the raising of children postseparation is very relevant to the question of continued mutuality andinterdependence.

(g)

However, where the parties both take steps post separation to unravel theirinterdependencies, effect a clean break, and do not have children in their care, thenthe objective of promoting self sufficiency within a reasonable time post separationbecomes more important.

(h)

If the situation giving rise to need is a medical problem, then the timing of the onsetis important. If a disability arises out of a pre-existing known condition that existedduring the marriage or at the time of breakdown of the marriage, there would exist aconnection between the disability and the marriage or its breakdown.

(i)

If the marriage is short lived, the objective of promoting self sufficiency will begiven greater weight in assessing entitlement to support.

Analysis of Entitlement to Support

[212] I reiterate the core question: taking into account all of the circumstances of the particularcase, and the objectives underlying a spousal support award, is it reasonable on an objectiveanalysis to expect the parties to continue to be responsible for each other in the event of postseparation need, and if so, for how long?
Presumption of Mutuality and Interdependence

[213] In this case, there is no evidence prior to separation to rebut the presumption of mutualityand interdependence arising from the marriage. This is a fifteen-year marriage with two children,who are still dependent. Each parent is presently taking primary responsibility for one child asthey pursue their final year in high school (Reign living with the Applicant) and in first yearuniversity (Justice).

30

31

[214] The Respondent’s native status, which is passed to the children, enables them to pursuetheir studies without cost. This is a significant financial advantage to both parties and thechildren.

[215] During the fifteen-year marriage, the Respondent provided stability and financial supportto the children and to the Applicant when he experienced several years with serious financialdifficulties. It was not until the last two years of the marriage that the Applicant was in stableemployment with consistent earnings which exceeded the earnings of the Respondent.
Time

[216] The slip and fall took place 22 months post separation, but the pleadings were notamended until four years post separation, when the Respondent was terminated from heremployment. I find that the time post-separation, while the parties are still litigating and marriedwith dependent children, is not an unreasonable period of time to make a claim to determineentitlement for spousal support. The Respondent could not amend her pleading and claim supportwhile she was still in receipt of her full salary. The employer did not terminate the Respondentfrom her position for two years and therefore she had no financial need until that terminationtook place. That the Applicant was not called on for support at an earlier time due to thegenerous conditions of the Respondent’s employment is to his advantage and should not defeatthe Respondent’s claim.
Pre-existing Injury During the Marriage

[217] The available medical evidence supports the conclusion that the Respondent had a preexisting condition during the marriage that was significantly exacerbated by the slip and fallaccident: see paras. 195-203.

[218] The Respondent alleges that there was a history of physical abuse during the marriagethat was a contributing factor to her present condition. The note made in the file dated September30, 2010 is some confirmation of this allegation: see para. 197. I do not need to rely on thisallegation to determine entitlement to support, as the available evidence confirms a pre-existingmedical condition during the marriage.
Conclusions

[219] I conclude that the Respondent is entitled to some time limited support to see her throughher present difficulties, but not to indefinite spousal support. During the fifteen-year marriage,she financially supported the Applicant in difficult times when he had back problems, and whenhe declared personal bankruptcy.

[220] It appears that the only viable treatment for the Respondent to alleviate the pain is a hipreplacement. She is presently being assessed and is on the waiting list. She is taking heavy dosesof medication to control the pain, which is worrisome and may create dependency problems.

Interdependence During the Marriage

32

next year living in residence. The Applicant did not claim any child support. Justice is attendinguniversity and living in residence that is fully funded. I find in these circumstances that anyspousal support should begin when Reign begins attending university in September 2017.
Though not argued, it would be reasonable that there should be a notional offsetting of spousalsupport and child support until September 2017.

[222] The Respondent is in receipt of $3,000.00 per month long term disability insurance,which is non-taxable. She also receives small monthly amount from her insurance on two of thethree credit cards with debts that accrued during the marriage, enabling her to make the monthlyinterest payments without penalty.

[223] Based upon my determination of the trust claim, the Respondent is the sole owner of theHome. There is a rental apartment that is unoccupied. The Respondent testified that she maymove to the basement, and rent the upper two floors. The Respondent is obliged to maximize herincome potential prior to claiming against the Applicant. I attribute $1,350.00 income per monthto the Respondent, based upon the income generated on the basement apartment at the time ofseparation.

[224] Counsel for the Applicant, at my request, submitted Spousal Support Guidelines with theRespondent’s present income, as well as a calculation including the imputed rent. The mid-pointof spousal support including the imputed rent is $282.00 per month. If the Respondent isrequired to sell the Home to pay off her debts and is no longer in receipt of the rental income,then the midrange of support would be $763 per month.

[225] Based upon the Respondent’s present circumstances and assuming she remains in theHome, the spousal support shall be paid in the amount of $282.00 per month beginningSeptember 2017 when their son is no longer residing with the Applicant, for a period of threeyears. If the Respondent is able to return to full time employment prior to that time aftersuccessful treatment, the support shall end.

[226] The parties shall exchange their tax returns annually beginning in May 2018 for threeyears to determine the mid-range of spousal support. Even if the surgery does not rectify theproblem, the spousal support shall terminate after three years, balancing entitlement with theneed for finality and recognizing the principle that marriage is not a form of lifetime insurance.

[227] Similarly, if the Respondent receives income replacement in the outstanding action, thespousal support shall end. The Respondent shall provide a direction to her counsel in thelitigation to allow information to be provided to counsel for the Applicant.
Interest Payments of Joint Line of Credit

[228] The Applicant has made interest payments on the joint line of credit debt of the parties.
This debt predated the acquisition of the Home and is not relevant to the Applicant’s trust claim.

[221] The Applicant is supporting Reign, who is attending grade 12 and will go to university

33
However, the Respondent should repay the Applicant for half of these debt payments made onher behalf.

[229] If the parties are unable to agree with respect to costs, the parties may make brief writtensubmissions attaching any offers to settle within 30 days of the release of these reasons.

J. Wilson J.
Released: May 19, 2017

Costs

Year1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016

Applicant
$7,396 gross, - $3,603 net
$18,163
$36,610
$37,625
$43,990
$30,346 ($4,408 RRSP)
Unknown
$3,453 (post-bankruptcy)
$25,665 gross - $14,314 net
$60,200 gross - $30,456 net
$44,739 gross - $12,352 net
$47,880 gross - $13,745 net +
$22,000 disability
$15,933 + $24,000 disability
$6,065 + $24,000 disability
$61,067
$74,391
$86,370
$77,147
$82,011
$82,243

Respondent
$33,320
$16,752
$18,969
$31,984
$44,877
$41,400
$41,400
$43,528
$54,838
$64,193
$61,000
$61,000
$61,602
$65,756
$65,209
$63,798
$67,018
$67,018 (based on oral evidence)
$67,018
$50,000 (taxable plus disability)

Schedule “A”
AmendedSUMMARY OF HISTORIC INCOME

CITATION: Ryan v. Ryan, 2017 ONSC 1377
COURT FILE NO.: FS-13-386523
DATE: 20170519

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
JUSTIN BRADLEY RYAN
Applicant
– and –
CORENA MARGARET RYAN
RespondentREASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Wilson J.
Released: May 19, 2017

ONTARIO

