CITATION: Sirois v. Weston, 2017 ONSC 3241
COURT FILE NO.: 11-52990
DATE: 20170526

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

LOUIS SIROIS and CHANDRA
MARTENS
Plaintiffs )
– and –
PAMELA ADRIANA WESTON in her
capacity as power of attorney for property
of RANDALYN LORRAINE WESTON,
and BRIAN WILSON and TANYA
LEMCKE
Defendants

Christopher S. Spiteri, for the Plaintiffs

Hans Engell, for the Defendant, TanyaLemcke

HEARD: By written submissions

COSTS ENDORSEMENT
TOSCANO ROCCAMO J.

[1]

The Defendant (Lemcke) hereinafter (“The Defendant”) successfully moved for summary

judgment on the grounds that the Plaintiffs’ action for damages was prescribed by the statutorylimitation period.

[2]

The Plaintiffs sued the Defendant, a real estate agent, more than two years after learning

that she failed to inform them that an energy company had registered an option to build a solarfarm next to their property. They had already commenced an action against their own solicitorthe Defendant, Brian Wilson, within months of the purchase of the property.

ONTARIO

[3]

The Defendant claims partial indemnity costs of $22,405.07 inclusive of fees and HST,

plus total disbursements of $7,210.72.
The claim for costs does not include fees in relation to the summary judgment motion for

which I awarded the Defendant costs as agreed between the parties, fixed at the all-inclusiveamount of $5,000.00.

[5]

The Defendant has already received the sum of $3,200.00 paid by LawPro for costs in

relation to a cross claim by the Defendant Wilson. As such, this amount should be offset againstthe Bill of Costs to arrive at a net partial indemnity claim for costs in the approximate amount of
$19,000.00 plus disbursements.
Application of the Factors in rule 57.01(1)

[6]

The parties did not refer me to any Rule 49 Offers to Settle. Consequently, I refer only to

the costs principles in play in the exercise of my discretion to fix costs.

[7]

Having regard to the principal of indemnity, I note that the Plaintiffs take no issue with

the hourly rates charged by counsel for the Defendant, which are comparable to those of theirown counsel on the summary judgment motion.

[8]

Second, I also note that the Plaintiffs’ Bill of Costs does not refer to partial indemnity

rates, but only actual rates charged to the Plaintiffs in the total amount of $33,315.00. The Bill ofCosts excludes hours spent in relation to the summary judgment motion. However, it does notinclude time spent for preparation and attendance at mediation. The Defendant’s submissionsincorrectly posit that the Plaintiffs’ Bill of Costs failed to capture time spent on preparation andattendance for Examinations for Discovery. Nevertheless, it may be inferred that, factoring in
$5,000.00 for mediation costs, the Plaintiffs would have incurred actual costs in a range of
$38,500.00, or partial indemnity costs of between $19,250.00 and $23,000.00.

[9]

There is no issue taken that the Defendant was entirely successful on the summary

judgment motion, and that the matter would have been of some importance to the DefendantLemcke’s reputation. On the other hand, the Plaintiffs raise concerns with respect to the amountof costs claimed, which they argue lie outside the Plaintiffs’ reasonable expectations per Boucher

[4]

1. The Defendant was only added to the proceedings approximately two years after theaction was commenced. By contrast, the Plaintiffs’ costs reflect efforts in relation to threeDefendants in meeting their burden of proof.
2. The Defendant has recovered not only costs of the summary judgment motion, but hasalso received costs of $3,200.00 paid by LawPro in relation to the cross claim brought bythe Defendant Wilson.
3. The motion was not complex. The facts were straight forward, and mainly involved anapplication of the law. It took under two hours to argue.
4. The Defendant could have brought the motion for summary judgment at first instance,and elected thereby to incur increased and unnecessary costs in the proceedings.
5. Finally, as a residual matter relevant to costs, the Plaintiffs note the Defendant admittedthat she did not believe the property was suitable for the Plaintiffs, and said nothing tothem.
Conclusions

[10]

I fail to see how the Defendant’s admission had any real impact on the costs of the action,

which pertained to the failure to advise of the option to build a solar farm registered on title bythe energy company adjacent to the property purchased by the Plaintiffs.

[11]

In my opinion, it was also reasonable for the Defendant’s counsel to incur the costs of

documentary and oral discovery in order to ascertain the strengths and weaknesses of a defencebased on the statutory limitation period. Moreover, the Plaintiffs claimed both general andspecial damages without specifying quantum. Given that the action was not brought under thesimplified rules, the potential exposure was over $100,000.00 in damages.

[12]

On the other hand, I accept that the Defendant would have known the case she had to

meet without incurring the costs of preparation and attendance at mediation, and could haveelected to proceed with her summary judgment motion at any earlier stage in the proceedings.

[13]

Under the circumstances, in light of costs already received by the Defendant and costs

unnecessarily incurred in relation to the mediation, the Defendant’s claim for fees should drop

regard to the following:

from $19,827.50 to $10,220.50 which I round down to the sum of $10,000.00 inclusive of HST.
To this amount, I award the Defendant her disbursements of $7,210.72 with which the Plaintiffs

[14]

As such, the Defendants are awarded total costs in the amount of $17,210.72 inclusive of

taxes and disbursements.

Toscano Roccamo J.
Released: May 26, 2017

take no issue.

CITATION: Sirois v. Weston, 2017 ONSC 3241
COURT FILE NO.: 11-52990
DATE: 20170526

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
LOUIS SIROIS and CHANDRA MARTENS
Plaintiffs
– and –
PAMELA ADRIANA WESTON in her capacity aspower of attorney for property of RANDALYN
LORRAINE WESTON, and BRIAN WILSON andTANYA LEMCKE
DefendantsCOSTS ENDORSEMENT
Toscano Roccamo J.
Released: May 26, 2017

