CITATION: Sorbam Investments Ltd. v. Litwack, 2017 ONSC 3265
COURT FILE NO.: 12-53595
DATE: 2017/05/26

RE:

SORBAM INVESTMENTS LTD. - PlaintiffAND
ALAN DAVID LITWACK, GARY MICHAEL LITWACK and DEBORAH
RUTH LITWACK, in their capacity as Estate Trustees of the ESTATE OF
MOSES LITWACK, deceased, SAMUEL LITWACK and 1129892 ONTARIO
LIMITED - Defendants

BEFORE:

Madam Justice Liza Sheard

COUNSEL: Michael S. Hebert for the PlaintiffTamara Farber for the Defendants and Moving Parties, Alan David Litwack, GaryMichael Litwack and Deborah Ruth Litwack, in their capacity as Estate Trusteesof the Estate of Moses Litwack, deceased and Samuel LitwackHEARD:

By Way of Written SubmissionsCOSTS ENDORSEMENT

[1]
The defendants, Alan David Litwack, Gary Michael Litwack and Deborah Ruth Litwack,in their capacity as Estate Trustees of the Estate of Moses Litwack, deceased, and SamuelLitwack (collectively the “Litwacks”) successfully moved for summary judgment, dismissingthis action as against them. The motion was granted and on February 24, 2017, the action wasdismissed as against the Litwacks.

[2]
The Litwacks seek their costs both of the motion for summary judgment and of theaction.
Costs of the Motion for Summary Judgment

[3]
The Litwacks seek costs of the motion for summary judgment on a substantial indemnitybasis in the amount of $42,022.19 inclusive of fees, and disbursements plus HST on that amount.
They put forward three grounds for that position:
(i)

a near offer of settlement: although they did not serve an offer to settle upon theplaintiff, by email of August 2, 2016, counsel for the Litwacks advised that shewould recommend that her client would pay the plaintiff $10,000 by way ofsettlement/contribution/Pierringer;

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

[4]

(ii)

a without prejudice settlement letter dated October 27, 2016 in which theLitwacks offered to settle on the basis of a dismissal of the action as against themwith costs, but on a scale lower than partial indemnity. That letter did set out thevarious heads of potential liability and the Litwacks’ reasons why liability wouldnot be found as against them. The arguments set out in that letter are closelyconsistent with the reasons given for the dismissal of the plaintiff’s action asagainst the Litwacks; and

(iii)

that the Litwacks had no “viable alternative” to a motion for summary judgmentor they would have been required to take part in the three to four week trialscheduled to proceed in June 2017.

A “near offer” does not attract the costs consequences of an actual offer.

[5]
The plaintiff objects to costs being awarded on a substantial indemnity basis. Theplaintiff asserts that the neither the August 2, 2016 email nor the letter of October 27, 2016 wereoffers to settle. The plaintiff says that the letter of October 27, 2016 does not include a formaloffer but only says that the Litwacks were interested in costs recovery and amenable todiscussions.

[6]
That plaintiff’s assertion that the October 27, 2016 letter did not contain an offer to settle,ignores the first paragraph of the letter which reads:
Second, we extend a further offer to dismiss the action as against our clients withcosts.

[7]
In the October 27, 2016 letter, the Litwacks offer to consent to a dismissal of the actionas against them with costs. Moreover, in an attempt to persuade the plaintiff that the action oughtto be dismissed, the letter also outlines the reasons for the position taken by the Litwacks. I
conclude that the letter of October 27, 2016 does constitute a settlement proposal which shouldbe taken into account by this Court when determining the appropriate scale of costs.

[8]
There is no evidence of any offers to settle made by the plaintiff. The absence of any suchoffers tends to support the third ground upon which the Litwacks seek costs on a substantialindemnity basis: had they not brought a motion for summary judgment the Litwacks would havebeen required to participate in a three to four week trial in June 2017.

[9]
Both the email of August 2, 2016 and the October 27, 2016 letter were sent in the hope ofsettlement and with clear notice that, unless there was a settlement, the Litwacks intended tobring a motion for summary judgment.

[10] In support of their claim for costs, the Litwacks ask the Court to consider the followingfactors under r. 57 of the Rules of Civil Procedure:
(a)

the amount claimed: the amount claimed was $4 million;

(b)

the complexity of the proceeding: there were four headings of potential liability,which issues were to have taken three to four weeks of trial time;

(c)

the importance of the issues: these issues are clearly important to the Litwacksgiven the size of the claim and given the death, ill-health, age and mentalincapacity of the Litwacks’ principal witnesses. The Litwacks further argue thatthe issues in this case are of broader importance to the commercial landlordcommunity;

(d)

the conduct of any party that intended to shorten or lengthen unnecessarily theduration of the proceeding: the Litwacks assert that the plaintiff refused toprovide evidentiary support for its claim and refused to admit various facts. Theyalso assert that the plaintiff served responding materials only four days before thehearing of summary judgment motion despite having been served with a Notice ofMotion in August 2016 and the supporting affidavit in December 2016. Further, itwas not until January 10, 2017, days before the hearing, that the plaintiffabandoned its strict liability claim (Rylands v. Fletcher), which it did in itsResponding Factum;

(e)

whether any steps in the proceeding were improper, vexatious or unnecessaryor taken through negligence, mistake or excessive caution: the Litwacks arguethat the plaintiff made no settlement offers and failed to respond to the offersmade by the Litwacks;

(f)

a party’s denial or refusal to admit anything that should have been admitted:
the Litwacks point to their Request to Admit they served and to the paragraphsthat the plaintiff refused to admit, but did not address in the motion materials.

[11] In addition to the Litwacks’ arguments above, I would also note that in its respondingmaterials and in argument at the outset of the hearing of the summary judgment motion, theplaintiff unsuccessfully raised technical objections to the Litwacks’ use on the motion of certaindiscovery transcripts. To some degree, those objections lengthened the hearing of the motion.

[12] In response to the third ground raised by the Litwacks - that they had no choice but tomove for summary judgment - the plaintiff asserts that the summary judgment motion wasbrought too close to the trial, which is a factor that ought to be taken into account in awardingcosts.

[13] On that issue, the evidence is that the plaintiff was given advance notice of the Litwacks’
intention to bring a summary judgment motion. The Litwacks’ Notice of Motion was served inAugust 2016 but not returnable until early 2017. After serving the Notice of Motion, theLitwacks pursued settlement with the plaintiff and held off delivering their supporting affidavituntil December. Given those timelines, and the alternative of participating in a long trial, I
conclude that the Litwacks were reasonable in pursing their motion for summary judgment whenthey did.

[15]
The plaintiff argues that this was not a complex proceeding and did not involve anycross-examinations or lengthy affidavits and that the issues were legal ones. Those argumentssupport the bringing of a motion for summary judgment and are properly considered indetermining costs.

[16] The central argument made by the plaintiff/respondent on the motion is the amount of thecosts sought by the Litwacks. The plaintiff argues that the time spent by the Litwacks’ seniorcounsel is excessive. For example, the plaintiff asserts that senior counsel spent too much time
(36.8 hours) communicating with her clients and counsel; spent too much time on discoveries
(21.7 hours for a one-day examination); and too much time was charged for the pre-trial (34.3
hours), when the pre-trial was only 3 hours. The plaintiff asserts that work should have beendelegated to more junior counsel.

[17] The plaintiff particularly objects to paying costs for a mediation, which was not attendedby the Litwacks’counsel. Instead, the Litwacks proposed that one of the Litwacks’ sonsparticipate in the mediation via telephone. As a result, the mediation did not proceed. Theplaintiff faults the Litwacks for not properly taking part in the mediation, which was prejudicialto the plaintiff.

[18] The plaintiff also asserts that, although the claim was for approximately $3 million, theLitwacks knew that the plaintiff had incurred remediation costs of only approximately
$200,000.00.
Time Spent

[19] Based on the costs outlined submitted by the Litwacks, it appears a total of 60.4 hourswas spent by Ms. Farber on the summary judgment motion (including preparation of a Requestto Admit). In addition, 19.5 hours was spent on the motion by others in Ms. Farber’s firm. Theplaintiff asserts that the time incurred by counsel for the Litwacks on the summary judgmentmotion also appeared to include 3 hours of travel time and notes that the Litwacks, who did andstill reside in Ottawa, choose to retain out-of-town counsel.

[20] The plaintiff acknowledges that the Litwacks’ were free to choose out-of-town counsel,but objects to paying additional costs as a result of that choice.

[21] Given the nature of the plaintiff’s claim, it may have been reasonable for the Litwacks’ tohave retained counsel, such as Ms. Farber, who has special expertise in the subject area. Theplaintiff’s claim was asserted under four different headings of damages. The claim arose fromhistorical contamination, which required technical expert evidence. The amounts claimed werehigh, and could have been potentially devastating for the Litwacks, who were individuallynamed.

[14] This case was well-suited to a summary judgment: the evidence of the Litwackswitnesses was known to the plaintiff and unlikely to change at trial given the death, incapacityand old age of the individual defendants and principal witnesses. The claim was historical innature and a determination of liability did not rest on findings of credibility.

[22] While the plaintiff asserts that the claim was inflated and that the plaintiff had onlyincurred only $200,000.00 for remediation, the amount of the claim was the discretion of theplaintiff, which could have amended the claim or conceded that the damages would be capped ata lower amount than claimed. Also, in addition to recovery of its remediation costs, the plaintiffwas seeking damages for the “stigma” that attached to the land by reason of the historicalcontamination.

[23] There is merit to the position taken by the plaintiff that much of the work was done bysenior counsel and a significant amount of time was spent in communication with her client andwith counsel. It must also be noted that the time spent was as a result of the nature of the claimbeing historic, which would have required investigations of historic records includingmanagement records; that one of the defendants died during the litigation, as a result of which,the estate of Moses Litwack had to be represented by his three estate trustees; and that thesurviving Litwack, Samuel Litwack, was elderly and his examination was conducted by way ofinterrogatories, which would have added to the time spent in communicating with clients.

[24] The plaintiff submits that an appropriate award of costs on the motion for summaryjudgment would be $15,000.00 and points to the plaintiff’s costs on the motion which totalled
$26,033.00 on a full indemnity basis, inclusive of disbursements and HST. By comparison theactual time spent by the Litwacks counsel is $45,199.04 ($39,999.15 plus HST of $5,199.89)
plus disbursements of $2,286.03 ($2,023.04 plus HST of $262.99) for a total of $47,485.07. Thefees and disbursements incurred by the plaintiff are is approximately 55% of that incurred by theLitwacks. However, it should be recognized that the Litwacks were the moving parties on thesummary judgment motion shouldered the onus of proof.
Analysis

[25] The Court’s discretion in determining costs is subject to the overriding principle ofreasonableness. (Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario (2004) 71
O.R. (3d) 291 (C.A.)).

[26] Rules 57.01 (0.a) and (0.b) also require the Court to consider the principle of indemnity,the experience of the Litwacks’ lawyer - touched on above - and the amount of costs that theplaintiff could reasonably expect to pay for the motion. The disparity between the fees anddisbursements incurred by the parties poses the greatest challenge to the application of the latterfactor. Given what the plaintiff had spent on the summary judgment motion, could it reasonablyhave expected to pay partial or even substantial indemnity costs to the Litwacks in an amountthat exceeded the full amount it paid to its own lawyer?
Disposition: Costs on Summary Judgment Motion

[27] After considering the relevant factors I conclude that it is fair and reasonable to fix theLitwacks’ costs of the summary judgment motion at $24,860.00 ($22,000.00 + HST $2,860.00)
for fees.

[28] The Litwacks asked that disbursements of $4,067.78 be divided equally between themotion and the action, but I have chosen to deal with them here.

[30] I have determined that the Litwack disbursements of $4,067.78 will be reduced by
$1,726.76 which they have identified as out-of-town travel expenses. There will be a furtherdeduction of $214.33, which is identified as accommodation, taxi of $176.80, and meals of
$22.34 for a total deduction of $2,140.23. As a result the total disbursements allowed theLitwacks is $1,927.55 ($4,067.78 - $2,140.23) plus HST of $208.37 (HST is payable on all but
$324.70 of the disbursements) for total disbursements of $2,135.92.

[31] In determining the fair and reasonable amount, I have chosen an amount that it is greaterthan partial indemnity costs and lower than substantial indemnity costs. I have done so torecognize the offers of settlement made by the Litwacks.
Disposition: Costs of the Action

[32] The Litwacks seek their partial indemnity costs of the action which includes fees of
$43,414.80 plus HST. I need not deal here with disbursements as they were determined above.

[33] The Litwacks point out that the costs of the action covered litigation that spanned thecourse of five years and included the exchange of dozens of technical reports and that the feesaverage out to $8,500.00 per year of litigation.

[34] I do not propose to again review the r.57 factors but do take them into account whendetermining the fair and reasonable fees that should be awarded to the Litwacks.

[35] I accept the submissions of the plaintiff that no fees should be allowed for the mediationand that the time spent by lead counsel for the pre-trial of 15.3 hours was excessive and alsoincluded travel to and from Toronto to Ottawa.

[36] For the same reasons set out respecting the costs for the summary judgment motion, I donot accept the arguments put forth by the plaintiff that excessive time was spent by lead counselin communicating and corresponding with her clients and counsel.

[37] I fix the Litwacks costs of the action at $31,200.00 + HST of $4,056.00 for a total awardof $ 35,256.00.
Summary: Total Costs

[38]

The costs payable by the plaintiff to the Litwacks are:
a) Summary judgment motion:

$26,995.92

b) Action:

$35,256.00

[29] The appendix attached to the Litwacks’ cost outline does not include travel dates.
Therefore, I will treat the disbursements for the action as a whole. The Litwacks ask fordisbursements totalling $4,067.78. That amount does not accord with the “Costs RecapSummary” included in the materials but it is what they have asked for in their “Cost Outline-FullCase History”.

Total:

$62,251.92

Released: May 26, 2017

L. Sheard J.

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
RE:

SORBAM INVESTMENTS LTD. PlaintiffAND
ALAN DAVID LITWACK, GARY
MICHAEL LITWACK and DEBORAH
RUTH LITWACK, in their capacity asEstate Trustees of the Estate of MosesLitwack, deceased, SAMUEL
LITWACK and 1129892 ONTARIO
LIMITED-Defendants

BEFORE:

Madam Justice Liza Sheard

COUNSEL: Michael S. Hebert for the PlaintiffTamara Farber for the Defendants andMoving Parties, Alan David Litwack,Gary Michael Litwack and Deborah RuthLitwack, in their capacity as EstateTrustees of the Estate of Moses Litwack,deceased and Samuel Litwack

COSTS ENDORSEMENT

L. Sheard J.
Released: May 26, 2017

CITATION: Sorbam Investments Ltd. v. Litwack, 2017 ONSC 3265
COURT FILE NO.: 12-53595
DATE: 2017/05/26

