SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO
RE:

Srebrolow Lebowitz Spadafora PC
AND:
PW Lawyers Professional Corporation and Paul Wilkins

BEFORE:

Madam Justice J. T. Akbarali.

COUNSEL: J. Srebrolow and G. Fabiano, for the Plaintiff/Moving PartyJ. Katz, for the Defendants/Responding PartiesHEARD:

May 16, 2017
ENDORSEMENT

Overview

[1]
The defendant, Paul Wilkins, was employed by the plaintiff firm, Srebrolow LebotwitzSpadafora PC (“SLS”) as an associate lawyer practicing in the field of plaintiff personal injury.
Mr. Wilkins decided to open his own firm, Pazuki Wilkins LLP. He gave SLS notice of hisintention to leave.

[2]
Mr. Wilkins and SLS entered into a written agreement to govern the terms of Mr.Wilkins’ separation from the firm. It required each party to make payments to the other inrelation to files retained by each. Disputes have arisen with respect to the amounts paid under theagreements. Most of them have been resolved. On this motion, I am asked to determine whetherthe fees owing to SLS under the agreement are reduced by certain referral fees paid out by Mr.Wilkins.
The Agreement

[3]
Pursuant to the parties’ written agreement, Mr. Wilkins was entitled to take certain filesof which he had carriage to his new firm under terms including that Mr. Wilkins would pay SLS
50% of the net fees he received on those files. Net fees represent fees after referral fees werepaid.

[4]
The agreement included a schedule of the files Mr. Wilkins would bring with him to hisnew firm. By the terms of the agreement, the schedule was to include a complete list of every

CITATION: Srebrolow Lebowitz Spadafora PC v. PW Lawyers Professional Corporation et al.,2017 ONSC 3045
COURT FILE NO.: CV-16-564796
DATE: 20170519

- Page 2 -

[5]
In addition, the agreement provided that on the resolution of files of which Mr. Wilkinshad had carriage and that remained at SLS, Mr. Wilkins was entitled to receive 20% of the netfees that he would have generated had he remained at the firm.
Background to the Action and Position of the Parties

[6]
In the summer of 2016, SLS learned from the website of PW Lawyers Corporation (Mr.Wilkins’ most recent firm) that two files related to a particular client, K, – an accident benefitclaim and a tort claim – had been settled for $5,900,000. K’s files are identified on the scheduleto the agreement between the parties, but no referral source or referral fee is identified in respectof K’s claims. According to SLS’s records, it had been paid $109,022.40 in respect of K’saccident benefits claim but nothing in respect of the tort claim. SLS thus believed it was entitledto a significant amount which Mr. Wilkins had not paid.

[7]
Thereafter SLS sent correspondence and made various demands to which Mr. Wilkinsdid not satisfactorily respond. SLS decided to commence an action and obtained leave to serve aNotice of Motion for Summary Judgment, seeking partial summary judgment, together with theoriginating process. The claim has since been defended, responding materials served and crossexaminations on affidavits conducted.

[8]
In his Statement of Defence and Counterclaim, and his responding materials on themotion, Mr. Wilkins raised the issue of set-off, and claimed that SLS owed him money pursuantto the agreement in respect of the files remaining at SLS that had resolved and of which he hadhad carriage. Mr. Wilkins’ suspicions were correct. SLS had not paid certain amounts owing toMr. Wilkins from as early as 2013.

[9]
By the time they appeared before me, the parties had significantly narrowed the issues,such that the motion for partial summary judgment has become, in effect, a motion for summaryjudgment. SLS and Mr. Wilkins agree that SLS owes Mr. Wilkins $65,054.63 inclusive of HST
in respect of the fees to which he is entitled under the agreement.

[10] Mr. Wilkins agrees that he owes SLS its share of fees on K’s tort claim. The parties agreethat, subject to the issue regarding referral fees that I explain more fully below, Mr. Wilkinsowes SLS $427,004.40 inclusive of HST. After setting off the amounts owed to Mr. Wilkins,SLS is entitled, at the least, to $361,949.77 inclusive of HST.

[11] However, SLS claims that its entitlement to fees from the K files is higher because itdisputes the referral fees paid out on the K files. In particular:

client and the names of all referral sources together with “a breakdown of the percentage paid tosaid referral source”. Since the files Mr. Wilkins was bringing with him were active, no referralfee would have yet been paid. Presumably SLS wanted to know what referral fees were agreed tobe paid on the resolution of the files Mr. Wilkins was taking with him. However, that is not whatthe written agreement required.

- Page 3 -

b. On the tort file, which was settled for $1,128,000, Mr. Wilkins paid out 33%, or
$372,240 plus HST, to Sharndip Khaira, a paralegal who was originally employedwith Mr. Wilkins at SLS, and who joined Mr. Wilkins at his new firm. SLS
disputes Mr. Khaira’s entitlement to a referral fee and, if he is entitled, argues thatthe fee is not reasonable. SLS does not dispute that the fee was paid.

[12] There are two referral sources because of the manner in which K came to Mr. Wilkins. K
originally came to Mr. Mann who called Mr. Khaira. Mr. Khaira was then an employee at SLS,and he referred the file to Mr. Wilkins, who was then also an employee at SLS. Thus, the lawfirm that received the referral was SLS. Mr. Wilkins departed with the K files. When theysettled, although Mr. Mann was expecting no referral fee, Mr. Wilkins decided he had to getsomething, and so he allotted the referral fee on the accident benefits file to Mr. Mann. Heallotted the referral fee on the tort file to Mr. Khaira.

[13] Thus, the key issue before me is how these referral fees ought to be considered indetermining the fees to which SLS is entitled pursuant to the agreement. There is a second issueas to the basis of liability of the corporate defendant, which did not exist nor was contemplated atthe time the written agreement was entered into.
Is summary judgment appropriate?

[14]

The parties agree the issues on this motion are amenable to summary judgment.

[16] In my view, this case is appropriate for summary judgment. The facts relevant to theissue of the validity of the referral fees are, for the most part, not in dispute and are readilydiscernible from the record.

[17] Similarly, the issue of the liability of the corporate defendant turns on facts that areapparent on the record before me.

[18] I am thus confident that I can find the necessary facts and apply the law to reach a justconclusion.

a. On the accident benefits file, which was settled for $288,000, Mr. Wilkins paidout a referral fee of 33%, or $95,040 plus HST, to Ranjit Mann, an immigrationlawyer. SLS agrees the fee was paid and accepts Mr. Mann’s entitlement to thefee. It argues that the fee is not reasonable and suggests 15% would be anappropriate referral fee.

- Page 4 -

[19] I turn first to the question of the referral fee paid to Mr. Mann. SLS relies upon Rule 3.66.1(1)(a) of the Rules of Professional Conduct, which requires that a referral fee be “fair andreasonable” and that it “does not increase the total amount of the fee payable by the client”. SLS
accepts that the referral fee did not increase the total amount of the fee payable by the client anddoes not dispute that the total amount of the fee was fair and reasonable; however, it argues thatthe referral fee is not fair and reasonable.

[20] Rule 3.6-6.1(1)(a) was not in place at the time the referral fees were paid out on the K
files. However, I find that it was an implied term of the parties’ agreement that, to reduce thefees payable to SLS, any referral fee that Mr. Wilkins paid out had to be fair and reasonable.

[21] There is very little evidence before me, and no jurisprudence, as to what constitutes “fairand reasonable” in the context of a referral fee. On his cross-examination, Mr. Wilkinsacknowledged that, while he was at SLS, referral fees were paid out at 15%. However, he alsodeposed that he could not function at SLS “because I was going to lose all my referral sourcesbecause I couldn’t pay the 33%”.

[22] The commentary to rule 3.6-1.1 sets out the factors that are relevant to determiningwhether a fee is fair and reasonable, but these factors appear to address the fees of counsel whohas had carriage of a file, not a referring lawyer’s referral fee. In any event, no one madeargument as to the reasonableness of the referral fee having regard to the factors identified in therule.

[23] SLS also acknowledged before me that Mr. Wilkins had paid referral fees on other files at33%. This appears to have been a business decision taken by Mr. Wilkins to encourage referrals.
As I have noted, the new rules regarding referral fees were not in place at the time the K fileswere settled and the referral fees paid.

[24] SLS could point me to nothing in the agreement between the parties that required Mr.Wilkins to discuss or agree to the referral fees paid out with SLS, or that would have limited himto paying out the 15% that was customary at SLS. SLS did not argue that by failing to list Mr.Mann and Mr. Khaira as referral sources of the K files in the schedule to the written agreementthat Mr. Wilkins was not entitled to reduce the net fees on which the fees payable to SLS wouldbe calculated by the referral fee he paid.

[25] SLS has failed to prove that the referral fee at 33% was not fair and reasonable at the timethat it was paid.
Referral Fee Paid to Mr. Khaira

[26]
Khairadefinesanyone

I turn next to the referral fee paid to Mr. Khaira. SLS argues that the money paid to Mr.is not properly a referral fee, but is, in fact, compensation. It points to Rule 3.6-6.0 which
“referral” as including “recommending another lawyer or paralegal to do legal work for aexcept where the work is done through the same law firm in which the referring lawyer

Referral Fee Paid to Mr. Mann

- Page 5 -

[27] In the result, SLS argues, what was paid to Mr. Khaira was in fact compensation for hiswork as a paralegal at Mr. Wilkins’ firm. It argues that Mr. Khaira is entitled to be compensatedfor his work, but not at its expense.

[28] Mr. Wilkins did not respond to this argument in oral argument and he filed no writtenargument.

[29] Although rule 3.6-6.0 was not in place at the time the referral fee was paid to Mr. Khaira,I find this argument persuasive. Nothing before me suggests that the nature of what can beconsidered a referral changed when rule 3.6-6.0 was enacted. Internal referrals may be relevantfor assessing compensation of firm members, but in my view, they are not referrals that attractreferral fees.

[30] I agree that the money paid to Mr. Khaira is not properly a referral fee but wascompensation. Accordingly, Mr. Wilkins was not entitled to deduct the money paid to Mr.Khaira from his net fees on the K tort claim when he calculated SLS’s entitlement. SLS is thusentitled to 50% of the funds paid to Mr. Khaira, or $210,315.60 inclusive of HST, in addition tothe $361,949.77 previously identified. In total, pursuant to the agreement, Mr. Wilkins owes SLS
$572,265.37 after setting off the amounts owing to him.
Liability of PW Lawyers Professional Corporation

[31] SLS argues that, whatever it is owed, liability falls on Mr. Wilkins pursuant to contractand against PW Lawyers Professional Corporation by way of constructive trust. Mr. Wilkinsadmitted on his cross-examination that the settlement funds were first paid into PW LawyersProfessional Corporation’s trust account and were eventually transferred to its general accountafter the file was billed. The defendants’ counsel argued that he “doesn’t see a constructive trust”
but did not articulate why.

[32] SLS relies on the doctrine of unjust enrichment to ground its entitlement to a constructivetrust against PW Lawyers Professional Corporation. To establish unjust enrichment, SLS mustprove an enrichment or benefit to the corporate defendant, that it suffered a correspondingdeprivation, and the absence of a juristic reason for the enrichment: see Reiter v. Hollub, 2017
ONCA 186 at para. 17.

[33] SLS has established that it has been deprived of $572,265.37 to which it was entitled andthat PW Lawyers Professional Corporation was enriched by that amount.

[34] Counsel for the defendants argued that the written agreement was a juristic reason for theunjust enrichment. He also argued that the corporation was not a party to the written agreement.
These are inconsistent arguments.

primarily practices”. SLS argues that Mr. Khaira was employed at SLS when the referral came inand that he worked on the K files. As such, he falls into the exclusion in the rule for “work donethrough the same law firm”.

- Page 6 -

[36] Mr. Wilkins’ evidence is that the funds were transferred into the corporation’s generalaccount where they were co-mingled with other funds. His evidence is that the money remainsavailable. Thus, I find PW Lawyers Professional Corporation is impressed with a constructivetrust in favour of SLS in the amount owing to SLS by Mr. Wilkins.

Interest

[37] SLS argues that interest on both, the amount owing to it and the amount owing to Mr.Wilkins, be disregarded. It acknowledges some delay on its part and suggests the interestcalculation would be in its favour in any event. The defendants’ counsel did not oppose thesuggestion. Accordingly, I order no interest in respect of any of the amounts owing.
Costs

[38] There remains the matter of costs. SLS was substantially successful on this motion,which, the parties agree, disposes of the action. There is no reason to depart from the general rulethat costs follow the event.

[39] After reductions to its bill of costs for time it would have expected to spend as a party hadit retained counsel rather than acting for itself1 , SLS seeks its costs of the action on a substantialindemnity scale of $29,642.00 inclusive of HST, plus disbursements inclusive of HST of
$3,889.68, for a total of $33,531.68. In contrast, the defendants would have sought $5,756.00 infees and disbursements, inclusive of HST, if successful.

[40] SLS did significant work on this motion, filing two factums, two books of authorities,and three affidavits. It produced detailed accounting records. In contrast, Mr. Wilkins delivered afive-page affidavit, and filed no factum or book of authorities. Both parties conducted a crossexamination of the other’s affiant.

[41] I am not surprised SLS’s fees are significantly higher; it did a lot more work. Thus, I donot consider the defendants’ costs to be an indication of their reasonable expectations of SLS’scosts. The expense involved in putting SLS’s materials together is obvious. The defendantswould have known that SLS’s costs were reasonably much higher than their own.

1

This time primarily relates to the time spent calculating what SLS owed Mr. Wilkins pursuant to the agreement.

[35] There is no contract between PW Lawyers Professional Corporation and SLS that wouldamount to a juristic reason for the enrichment. No other juristic reason is alleged, nor can I
identify one. I thus find that as against PW Lawyers Professional Corporation, SLS has made outa case for unjust enrichment. A constructive trust is an appropriate remedy for unjust enrichment:
Soulos v. Korkontzilas, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 217 at p. 238.

- Page 7 -

[43] However, I do not agree that an award of substantial indemnity costs is warranted in thecircumstances. I can identify no misconduct on the part of the defendants in the litigation tojustify costs on an elevated scale. It would have been far preferable for SLS and Mr. Wilkins tocommunicate with each other about these issues earlier. Each appears to have held back fundsowing from the other because they did not trust that the other was paying what each was owed.
On this, they were both right. When SLS attempted to begin a dialogue, Mr. Wilkins should haveengaged with the firm on the outstanding issues. This alone does not justify substantialindemnity costs. Neither party’s pre-action conduct is immune from criticism.

[44] I conclude that partial indemnity costs in the amount of $17,500 plus disbursements of
$3,889.68, all amounts inclusive of HST, are fair and reasonable.
Conclusion

[45] In summary, after setting off the amounts owing to Mr. Wilkins from SLS, the defendantsowe SLS $572,265.37 plus $21,389.68 in costs, disbursements and HST, for a total of
$593,655.05. By agreement of the parties, this disposes of the entirety of the action and thecounterclaim.

Justice J. T. AkbaraliDate: May 19, 2017

[42] Significant funds were at stake for the firm. Because the motion was thoroughlyprepared, the issues were able to be narrowed and the motion has resolved the entire proceeding.
I thus agree that SLS is entitled to costs in an amount greater than that disclosed on thedefendants’ costs outline.

