ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B E T W E E N:
SANDRA TONDAT

Plaintiff

- and HUDSON’S BAY COMPANY andQUINTERRA
PROPERTY
MANAGEMENT INC. and CINTAS
CANADA LIMITED
Defendants

Matt Lalande, for the Plaintiff

Kieran Dickson, for the Defendants

HEARD:
Milton

April 24 and 25, 2017, at

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

André J.

[1]

Ms. Sandra Tondat brings a claim for damages against Quinterra Property

Management Inc. (“Quinterra”) and the Hudson’s Bay Co. (the “Bay”) as a resultof a slip and fall on December 2, 2012. The parties have agreed on the quantumof damages in the event that either or both of the defendants are found liable.

CITATION: Tondat v. Hudson’s Bay Company, 2017 ONSC 3226
COURT FILE NO.: CV-1736/13
DATE: 20170526

-2-

accident.
SUMMARY OF THE EVIDENCE

[2]

Ms. Tondat, a Superintendent of Education with the Toronto District School

Board,

attended

the

Bay

store in Oakville,

on December

2,

2012,

at

approximately 1:00 p.m. to return a small vacuum cleaner. It had been rainingheavily earlier that morning. However, the rain had been reduced to a light drizzlewhen Ms. Tondat went to the store.

[3]

Ms. Tondat approached the two sets of doors at the southern end of the

building. She carried the vacuum in both hands. A patron of the store opened thedoor for her. Ms. Tondat entered and stepped onto a black floor mat which wasapproximately three feet high. Underneath the mat was a tiled floor. Ms. Tondatdid not see any debris or water on the floor.

[4]

Ms. Tondat slipped and fell as she stepped from the mat onto the tiled

floor. She fell on her right knee breaking her knee cap.

[5]

Ms. Tondat sat on the mat after she fell. She then noticed water on the

floor. Her buttocks became wet after she sat on the mat after the accident.

The only issue is whether the defendants are responsible for Ms. Tondat’s

-3There is no dispute regarding Ms. Tondat’s injuries, the medical treatment

she received or her rehabilitation. She required surgery to repair her injury. Shehad additional surgery one year later. She was off work for six months. Sherequired

extensive

physiotherapy.

She

experienced

prolonged

periods

of

depression following the accident.

[7]

Following the accident Ms. Tondat was attended to by the store’s manager

and two security guards. Her sister, Elena Dibattista, also attended the scene.
Ms. Dibattista confirmed that it was still drizzling after 1:00 p.m. on that day.

[8]

Ms. Dibattista saw her sister sitting on the floor following the accident. She

also saw that the floor was wet. She testified that she was concerned that thefloor tiles in the vestibule appeared wet. She was not cross-examined.

[9]

Douglas Derby, Quinterra’s Director of Corporate Affairs, testified that the

Bay store had contracted Quinterra to perform cleaning services at its Oakvillestore. He had no personal knowledge of the condition of the store on December2, 2012. He had no maintenance sheets or inspection forms for the store. He didnot know what cleaning, if any, had been done in the vestibule on December 2,2012.

[6]

-4The company’s time sheets showed that an employee had done “light

duty” at the store on December 2, 2012, but Mr. Derby did not know what shehad done. He had no evidence that this employee had cleaned the vestibule onthe date of the accident. The company’s records indicated that this employee hadperformed reduced cleaning on December 2, 2012. She was the only cleanerassigned to clean the 118,348 square foot Bay store on December 2, 2012.

[11]

Dr. Adam Campbell, who holds a Bachelor’s Degree in Kinetics and a

Ph.D. in Neuromechanics, was qualified, on consent, as an expert in the field ofanalyzing slip and fall accidents. He tested the floor in the vestibule on April 16,2014 and determined that the coefficient of friction of the floor, or its slipresistance, exceeded the acceptable standard when the floor was dry or wet. Heopined that the floor was not unreasonably dangerous when wet; or posed norisk of harm to a patron of the store. To that extent, Dr. Campbell suggested thatthe defendants are not liable for Ms. Tondat’s injuries.
PLAINTIFF’S POSITION

[12]

Ms. Tondat’s counsel submits that both defendants had a duty of care to

her under the Occupiers’ Liability Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. O.2, and that they patentlyfailed to discharge that duty. The Bay store had no procedures in place to protect

[10]

-5-

warning signs concerning water in the vestibule.

[13]

Ms. Tondat’s counsel submits that Quinterra is equally liable given its

substandard cleaning protocol at the store and its failure to ensure that thevestibule did not pose a hazard to patrons of the store. There is no evidence thatanything was done, either by Quinterra or by the Bay store, to mitigate or reducethe danger posed by water on the floor in the vestibule.
DEFENDANTS’ POSITION

[14]

The defendants’ counsel submits that the floor was safe and that it was

reasonable for the Bay to use a “matte finish tile” in the vestibule to discharge itsduty of care to its patrons. He submits that the flooring provided adequatetraction in dry and wet conditions, and accordingly, “did not constitute anunreasonable danger.” To that extent, the defendants are not liable for anydamages on account of Ms. Tondat’s unfortunate fall.
GOVERNING PRINCIPLES

[15]

Section 1 of the Occupiers’ Liability Act defines an “occupier” as a person

in physical possession of a property or a person who has responsibility for andcontrol over the condition of the premises.

patrons who entered the store in adverse weather, nor did they display any

-6-

Section 3(1) of the Act imposes on an occupier of property a duty to take

reasonable care so that persons entering on its premises and the propertybrought on the premises are reasonably safe.

[17]

Section 3(2) provides that an occupier’s duty of care applies whether or

not the condition was caused by the condition of the premises or by an activitycarried on in the premises.

[18]

Section 4(1) of the Act indicates that an occupier’s duty of care does not

apply with respect to risks willingly assumed by a person who enters thepremises.

[19]

In Waldick v. Malcolm (1989), 70 O.R. (2d) 717 (C.A.) at paras. 20, 25,

aff’d [1991] 2 S.C.R. 456, the Court of Appeal stated that:
[T]he Act imposes an affirmative duty on occupiers to make their premisesreasonably safe for persons entering them, by taking reasonable care to protectthem from foreseeable harm. This duty is not absolute and occupiers are notinsurers liable for any damages suffered by persons entering their premises. Thisstandard of reasonableness requires neither perfection nor unrealistic orimpractical precautions against known risks. However, occupiers are duty-boundto take such care as in all of the circumstances of the case is reasonable. In eachcase, the trier of fact must determine what standard of care is reasonable andwhether that standard of care has been met.

[20]

The plaintiff bears the onus, on a balance or probabilities, to prove that

the occupier breached their statutory duty of care by failing to take reasonablesteps to ensure that persons entering their premises were reasonably safe while

[16]

-7-

49.

[21]

In Morash v. McAllister Place Ltd., 1997 CarswellNB 105, at para. 33, the

court noted that a retailer’s liability to its customers will be determined by theextent to which it provided “reasonably safe premises for the purposescontemplated, that is, for the reasonable safety for its patrons of all ages,strengths, infirmities, shopping and carrying parcels throughout the [premises]
and, if not, whether any failure was the cause or a contributing cause of theplaintiff’s injury.”

[22]

Section 3 of the Act establishes a duty of care only, and not a

presumption of negligence. Accordingly, in order to establish liability, a plaintiffmust be able to identify some act or failure to act on the part of the occupier,which caused the injury complained of: see St. Louis-Lalonde v. CarletonCondominium Corp. No. 12, [2005] O.J. No. 2721(Q.L.), aff’d 2007 ONCA 108,2007 CarswellOnt 836 (W.L. Can.). Noted in Baltadjian v. Roman CatholicEpiscopal, 2017 ONSC 61, 2017 CarswellOnt 982 (W.L. Can.), at para. 29.

[23]

In McGrath v. Toronto Transportation Commission, [1946] O.W.N. 931,

the Court of Appeal noted at page. 932 that in order to establish the liability of an

doing so: see C.R. v. McDougall, 2008 SCC 53, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 41, at paras. 40-

-8-

connection between the negligent act of the occupier and the injury suffered.
APPLICATION OF THE GOVERNING PRINCIPLES TO THE FACTS OF THIS
CASE

[24]

There is no dispute that both defendants are occupiers of the subject

property pursuant to s. 1 of the Act.

[25]

Ms. Tondat fell on the floor of the vestibule of the Bay store on December

2, 2012. There is no evidence that at the time she fell, she was impaired byalcohol or drugs. Neither is there any evidence that she was in a hurry. She waswearing leather sandals with rubber soles. There is no evidence that her heelbecame caught on the mat thereby causing her to fall. There is no evidence ofany pre-existing medical condition that precipitated the fall. There is no evidenceof any spontaneous collapse of her right knee while she was in the vestibule.

[26]

There is evidence however, that there was water on the tiled floor in the

vestibule.

During

his

cross-examination

of

Ms.

Tondat,

counsel

for

the

defendants sought to raise doubt about the presence of water on the floor bysuggesting to her that she never told the two security officers and store managerwho attended the scene that there was water on the floor. While Ms. Tondat may

occupier, a plaintiff must establish, on a balance of probabilities, a causal

-9-

she had concerns about this.

[27]

I therefore find that the floor beyond the mat in the vestibule was indeed

wet when Ms. Tondat fell.

[28]

The timing of the fall, in my view, establishes a causative nexus between

the fall and the water on the floor. Ms. Tondat’s unchallenged testimony is thatshe fell when she extended her right foot from the mat onto the tiled floor. Thepresence of the water in the area is significant for a few reasons. The store wasoperating on a Christmas schedule and to that extent, customers were coming inand out of the store using that entrance for a few hours before the accident.
Second, it had been raining heavily earlier during the morning. Third, it wasraining lightly when Ms. Tondat entered the store. It is therefore reasonable toinfer that any water in the vestibule would have originated from outside the store.

[29]

In my view, it is well known within the sphere of human experience that

the presence of water on a floor will increase the likelihood of a slip and fall. Theextent to which that will occur will depend on a number of factors including, butnot limited to, the nature of the floor, the nature of the person’s footwear, themanner

of

walking

and

the

weather

conditions.

The

defendants

should

not have done so, Ms. Dibattista testified that the floor was indeed wet and that

- 10 -

manner of footwear when they entered the southern vestibule.

[30]

The defendants rely on the expert opinion of Dr. Campbell for the

proposition that the floor was not unreasonably dangerous when wet andaccordingly, the occupier was not required to take any remedial steps to abatethe risk.

[31]

Dr. Campbell, a Human Factors Consultant, was qualified, on consent, as

an expert in the analysis of slip and fall accidents. He visited the store on April16, 2014, and examined the vestibule. He examined the floor and concluded thatthe ceramic tiles had a matte finish. He endeavoured to measure the “slipresistance” of the floor to determine its traction or its surface “coefficient offriction.” He opined that the acceptable “coefficient of friction” of a floor is 0.3 orless. Any fraction greater than this number would exceed the acceptablecoefficient of friction for any floor surface.

[32]

Dr. Campbell used a machine called a Tribometre, “Bot-3000,” to

measure the coefficient of friction of the floor in the vestibule. He tested themachine before taking measurements and found it to be in good workingcondition. He applied a leather presspad to the floor and tested the dry tiles. Hethen saturated the entire vestibule area with approximately one inch of water and

reasonably have known that the patrons of the store would be wearing every

- 11 -

rubber foot in one location, and a dynamic test with the foot moving over the tilesat a constant rate.
RESULTS OF THE TEST

[33]

The coefficient of friction of the dry static test of the floor was 0.43, which

exceeded the acceptable level of the coefficient of friction.

[34]

The coefficient of friction when the floor was wet was 0.74 under static

conditions and 0.51 under dynamic conditions. Based on these findings, Dr.Campbell concluded that the floor in the vestibule posed no risk of slipping eitherwhen dry or wet. To that extent, the occupier was not required to keep it dry tomaintain safety or to post warning signs when wet, to maintain safety.

[35]

The defendants’ counsel submits that given the unchallenged testimony

of Dr. Campbell that the floor of the vestibule exceed the acceptable safety level,the court must find the defendants not liable for any injury suffered by Ms. Tondatas a result of her fall.

[36]

I disagree for the following reasons. I have the discretion to determine the

weight to be placed on Dr. Campbell’s evidence. He conducted his tests underideal or controlled conditions. He made a scheduled visit to the store. There werethree mats on the floor compared to two at the time of the accident. He saturated

tested the surface with a rubber test “foot.” He did a static test, one done with the

- 12 -

on December 2, 2012. Furthermore, he had no knowledge of the force Ms.Tondat applied to the floor; the angle at which her right foot contacted the floor;the presence or absence of any grease, oil or other cleaning substance on thefloor when the accident occurred; the effect of Ms. Tondat carrying a package inher hands when she stepped onto the floor; or the condition of the sole of hershoe when she fell.

[37]

Dr. Campbell testified that the footwear worn by Ms. Tondat was

considered in determining the acceptable coefficient of friction. However, thereare simply too many variables to conclude that the floor was inherently safeirrespective of the weather conditions, the wetness of the floor, the nature of theperson’s footwear or the presence of any oily or greasy substance on the floor.
Indeed, Dr. Campbell conceded in cross-examination that there were otherfactors that could affect the coefficient of friction of the floor of the vestibule.

[38]

In my view, Dr. Campbell’s testimony does not alter the fact that Ms.

Tondat slipped and fell because of the floor in the vestibule, at the very minimum,was wet. There is no evidence that a Quinterra employee cleaned the floor onDecember 2, 2012. There is no evidence that she even visited the area on thatday. There is no evidence concerning areas she cleaned in the 118,348 sq. foot

the floor with distilled water compared to rain water which was likely on the floor

- 13 -

her work had been supervised on that day to ensure that, given the weatherconditions on December 2, 2012, patrons seeking to participate in Christmasshopping would not have to contend with conditions that increased the possibilityof a slip and fall.

[39]

Not only is there no evidence of a safety system to abate the risk of a fall,

there is no evidence that whatever cleaning system Quinterra relied upon wasadjusted

to

the

adverse

weather

conditions:

see

Hussein

v.

Loblaws

Supermarket Ltd., 2000 CarswellOnt 1950 (W.L. Can.) (Sup. Ct.).

[40]

To the contrary, Ms. Tondat has established that Quinterra did not have a

system for dealing with water hazards in the vestibule and that, even if it did, itwas not working on December 2, 2012. To that extent, Ms. Tondat must succeedin her claim for damages against Quinterra: see Gardiner v. Thunder BayRegional Hospital, 1999 CarswellOnt 802 (W.L. Can.) (Ct. J. (Gen. Div.)).

[41]

The defendants rely on the Nova Scotia Supreme Court’s decision in

Miller v. Royal Bank of Canada, 2008 NSSC 32, 263 N.S.R. (2d) 121, for theproposition that to require them to display warning signs or establish a cleaningsystem in the vestibule would be to hold the defendants to a standard ofperfection that is not contemplated by the Act.

area of the Bay store on December 2, 2012. Neither is there any evidence that

- 14 -

The Miller case involved an action for damages for injuries sustained in a

slip and fall at a bank. The plaintiff fell after stepping off a mat and walking a fewfeet on the ceramic tiled floor which had a matte finish. It had not been raining;however there was moisture in the form of wet footprints on the floor. The bankdid not have a system in place to check the condition of the floor. The evidencedid not disclose that the plaintiff’s sandals contributed to her fall.

[43]

The court ruled in favour of the bank. It held that liability should not

extend to a slip on a wet footprint. It held further that the bank could not berequired to observe a standard of perfection or act as an insurer: see paras. 118119.

[44]

Counsel for the defendants is correct that the facts in the Miller case are

similar to those in the instant case. However, there are significant factualdifferences in the two cases. In Miller, it had not been raining prior to theaccident. The plaintiff in that case fell after walking a few feet on the matte tiles.
Further, the court in Miller decided not to attach liability to a slip on wet footprints,unlike this case where there is evidence that the floor in the vestibule was wetand that Ms. Tondat fell immediately after stepping onto the tile floor. For theabove reasons, the Miller case can be distinguished from this case.
CONCLUSION

[42]

- 15 -

Judgment is in favour of the plaintiff, Ms. Tondat. Quinterra is ordered to

pay her damages in the amount of $100,000.
COSTS

[46]

The parties are ordered to make written submissions regarding costs

within twenty-one (21) days of today’s date.

_____________________
André J.
Released:

May 26, 2017

[45]

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

B E T W E E N:
SANDRA TONDAT
-

and –

HUDSON’S BAY COMPANY andQUINTERRA PROPERTY MANAGEMENT
INC. and CINTAS CANADA LIMITED

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

André J.

Released:

May 26, 2017

CITATION: Tondat v. Hudson’s Bay Company, 2017 ONSC 3226
COURT FILE NO.: CV-1736/13
DATE: 20170526

