CITATION: Umeya v. Tebit, 2017 ONSC 2874
COURT FILE NO.: FS-13-386499-002
DATE: 20170510

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
AISHA UMEYA

– and –
HUMPHREY TEBIT

Applicant )
Respondent )

Erin Chaiton-Murray, for the Applicant

Katherine Robinson, for the Respondent

HEARD: April 6, 7 and 10, 2017

GILMORE J.
Overview

[1]
The Applicant (“Ms. Umeya”) brings this Motion to Change the order of Myers J. datedDecember 11, 2015. That order stipulates that the parties’ son, Rashard Umeya-Tebit, has hisprimary residence with Ms. Umeya and that the Respondent (“Mr. Tebit”) is to exercise accessduring specified times. Ms. Umeya brings the Motion to Change because she wants to movefrom Toronto to Belleville. She seeks to modify the current access arrangement given thedistance between Ms. Umeya’s proposed residence in Belleville and Mr. Tebit’s home inToronto. Registration of the child in a new school and daycare will also be required if the moveis permitted. Finally, Ms. Umeya seeks payment of arrears of s. 7 expenses as well as financialdisclosure and a new formula for determining Mr. Tebit’s income.

[2]
Mr. Tebit resists all of the relief sought by Ms. Umeya. His Response to Motion toChange seeks equal time with the child, an order that the child attend private school and an orderthat the custody and access provisions of any order resulting from this trial be enforced by theToronto Police Service or the police department in the area in which the child is residing.

ONTARIO

[3]
This case has had an extensive litigation history even though the child is only four yearsold and the parties separated in June 2012, less than a month after they were married. Ms. Umeyacommenced her original application in May 2013. The litigation has been ongoing ever since. Itis an unfortunate set of circumstances in which both parties have entrenched views as to what isbest for their child. Unfortunately, those views do not align.

[4]
A two-week trial was heard by Myers J. in November and December 2015. I haveparaphrased the relevant parts of the resulting judgment dated December 11, 2015 as follows:
(a)

Access exchanges are to take place at daycare or at a location near the daycare, asagreed.

(b)

Ms. Umeya must consult with Mr. Tebit on major decisions relating to the child’shealth care and religion but she has the final decision-making authority in thoseparenting areas. Mr. Tebit may expose the child to Mr. Tebit’s religion includingtaking the child to church, but the child is to be raised as a Muslim, unless Ms.Umeya agrees otherwise.

(c)

The parties are to decide jointly on the child’s schooling, failing which eitherparty may bring a Motion to Change.

(d)

Neither parent may remove the child from Canada without the other party’sconsent. Consent for travel with notice may not be unreasonably withheld.

(e)

Mr. Tebit may obtain a new birth certificate for Rashard listing Mr. Tebit as thechild’s father and may implement a change of name for Rashard from RashardUmeya to Rashard Umeya-Tebit. The name change may not be implemented untilsuch time as Mr. Tebit has paid all arrears of child and spousal support.

(f)

As of September 1, 2016, Mr. Tebit shall have access to the child as follows:
(i)

Alternate weekends, from after school/daycare on Friday to drop-off atschool/daycare on Monday morning.

(ii)

After school/daycare on Tuesdays to drop-off at school/daycare onWednesday mornings.

(iii)

After school/daycare on Thursdays returning the child to Ms. Umeya at6:30 p.m.

Background Facts

(g)

Ms. Umeya shall endeavour not to schedule the child’s appointments during Mr.Tebit’s time with the child, but if that is unavoidable, Mr. Tebit will take the childto the appointment.

(h)

If the child is ill (as defined by the daycare) on the day of an access visit, Ms.Umeya shall notify Mr. Tebit via Our Family Wizard (“OFW”) that the visit willbe missed. If the notification is within two hours of a visit, additional notificationvia text message shall be given.

(i)

The parent who does not have the child on his birthday shall have a three-hourvisit with the child on his birthday at a time which does not interfere with school.

(j)

Thanksgiving, Easter, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year’s Eve and NewYear’s Day shall be alternated.

(k)

The child shall be with Ms. Umeya on Eid, Mother’s Day and Ms. Umeya’sbirthday.

(l)

The child shall be with Mr. Tebit on Father’s Day and Mr. Tebit’s birthday.

(m)

Both parties shall ensure that the other is listed with the daycare, school andfamily physician. Both may obtain copies of any educational, medical and/orother professional report concerning the child directly from the professionalsinvolved.

(n)

The parties shall only communicate in writing and regular communication shallbe via OFW. Mr. Tebit shall pay the cost of both parties’ subscriptions to thisservice. The communication between the parties shall be courteous, brief andchild-focused.

(o)

Each party may enrol the child in extra-curricular activities during that party’stime with the child Consent from the other parent must be obtained if a parentwishes the cost of the activity to be shared or if the activity takes place on theweekend.

(p)

Both parties shall provide the other parent’s name to any list of requiredemergency contacts.

(q)

The parties are to cooperate re government documentation required to be obtainedfor the child.

(r)

Mr. Tebit shall pay child support in the amount of $880 per month based on animputed income of $100,000 for 2014 and 2015.

(s)

Expenses for daycare and Ensure ($150 per month plus HST at the time of thejudgment) shall be shared in accordance with the parties’ respective incomes.

(t)

The parties shall exchange income tax returns for the prior year by June 1 of eachyear so long as child support is payable.

(u)

Mr. Tebit was ordered to pay arrears of child support in the amount of $16,149
and, pursuant to a supplementary order of Myers J. dated January 6, 2016, arrearsof spousal support in the amount of $26,388. All of those amounts have beenpaid.

(v)

Mr. Tebit to pay pre- and post-judgment interests at the prescribed rates.

(w)

Mr. Tebit was held in contempt of an order of Chiappetta J. dated June 15, 2015
and an order of Wilson J. dated August 28, 2015. In lieu of sentencing, thecontempt was to be reflected as a factor in the determination of liability andquantum of costs. After receiving written costs submissions from both parties,Myers J. ordered no costs.

[5]
It is also important to note some of the factual findings made by Myers J. in his reasonsfor judgment. While he found overall that both parents had a loving and close relationship withtheir son, those findings were tempered by comments such as the following. Regarding Mr.Tebit: “Mr. Tebit does not differentiate his own wants from Rashard’s needs as well as he couldor should.” The trial judge agreed with the report of the Office of the Children’s Lawyer, whereit stated, “He dismisses Ms. Umeya’s concerns outright and sees his own views as paramount.”

[6]
As for Ms. Umeya, she was described as a great mother but “over-protective and inclinedto hyperbolize and catastrophize any perceived risk.” The trial judge dismissed Ms. Umeya’sconcerns that Mr. Tebit had a drinking problem, that he was obsessed with her or that bydisagreeing with her, Mr. Tebit was trying to control her. The trial judge also stated, in his costsendorsement of March 22, 2016, that Ms. Umeya’s “approach to issues concerning the child wasunreasonable and self-serving throughout.”

[7]
In terms of general observations, Myers J. found as follows: “Each questions the sincerityof the other’s [religious] observance.” “By fighting all the way with extreme positions, theparents have caused themselves distress which Rashard seems to have started feeling.”

[8]
Despite the trial judge’s clear warning about the necessity of the parties learning to getalong for the sake of their son, they have been to court on multiple occasions since December2015. In January 2016, Ms. Umeya brought a motion requiring Mr. Tebit to pay daycareexpenses directly to the daycare centre rather than through the Family Responsibility Office
(“FRO”). She alleged that Mr. Tebit was not paying his share of daycare to FRO promptlyresulting in her having to “front” the daycare cost, which she could not afford. Ms. Umeya wassuccessful and Mr. Tebit has paid his share of daycare expense directly to the daycare since then.

[9]
In May 2016 Ms. Umeya brought a motion seeking Mr. Tebit’s consent to travel toBuffalo with the child. He had refused to sign any consent on the basis that the trip wouldinterfere with his regularly scheduled access. The matter was resolved by way of a consentallowing Ms. Umeya to travel at specified times.

(c)

Commencing September 1, 2016:
(i)

on alternating weekends, Mr. Tebit shall pick up Rashard afterschool on Fridays and return him to school on Monday morning

(ii)

Mr. Tebit shall pick up Rashard after school on Tuesday and returnhim to school on Wednesday mornings

(iii)

Mr. Tebit shall pick up Rashard after school on Thursdays andreturn him to Ms. Umeya at 6:30pm

[11] Since the parties had decided that the child would remain in daycare until September2017, Ms. Umeya’s position was that the judgment’s reference to “school” in paragraph 8(c) wasunclear. She sought to prevent the access expansion from occurring until the child went to schoolin September 2017. Her motion was dismissed and she was ordered to pay $500 in costs to Mr.Tebit.

[12] In November 2016, Mr. Tebit brought a motion to restrain Ms. Umeya from moving toBelleville with Rashard. The motion was adjourned to November 24, 2016, to allow Ms. Umeyato file responding materials. A temporary order was made restraining Ms. Umeya from movingthe child outside of Toronto or taking him out of daycare. On the return of the motion the courtgave directions as to the timing of Ms. Umeya’s Motion to Change and scheduled a CaseConference on the Motion to Change for December 23, 2016. The matter was not resolved at theCase Conference and a Settlement Conference/Trial Management Conference was scheduled forFebruary 13, 2017. Unsuccessful attempts were made at that conference to settle and a hearingschedule was determined.

[13] Much of the background of this matter is set out in the reasons delivered by Myers J., atthe conclusion of the trial on December 11, 2015; however, to give the matter some context, thefollowing is of assistance. Ms. Umeya is 38 years old. She is a registered practical nurse andworks in cardiology and general medicine. She does shift work, often coordinating night andweekend work with times when the child is with Mr. Tebit.

[14] Ms. Umeya is a Muslim and Rashard is to be raised as a Muslim. Ms. Umeya and Mr.Tebit participated in a traditional Muslim marriage blessing before the marriage ceremony,which took place in June 2012. They separated some three weeks after their marriage. Mr. Tebitis a Christian and does not identify as Muslim. He explained that he went through a form ofconversion for the purpose of the wedding ceremony only.

[10] Ms. Umeya brought a motion in September 2016, seeking a change to the accessprovisions of the December 11, 2015 order. The judgment had provided for gradually increasingaccess between the date of the order and September 1, 2016. Paragraph 8(c) of the judgmentexpanded access as of September 1, 2016, as follows:

[16] The child, Rashard, was born on February 8, 2013 and is now four years old. He has beengoing to My Little School (“MLS”) daycare since he was ten months old. Ms. Umeya describedher son as generally healthy but prone to skin rashes and some respiratory problems that requirethe occasional use of a puffer. Mr. Tebit agrees that his son requires a puffer from time to timebut he disagrees with Ms. Umeya’s descriptions of the extent of Rashard’s skin rashes orrespiratory problems.

[17] Both parties have a close and loving relationship with their son. There is no doubt thatRashard receives the best of loving care and that all of his needs are met. The parties deservecredit for this but the credit ends there. The evidence of the parties on this motion with respect totheir relationship with Rashard was presented as a form of one-upmanship with each parentsuggesting that their time with Rashard and their interpretation of his needs was superior to thatof the other parent.

[18] Ms. Umeya has a litany of complaints about Mr. Tebit including late access returns onThursdays, a failure to give her access on Eid, a refusal to allow her time with the child on herbirthday (as per the trial judgment), a refusal to contribute to the cost of soccer, a failure to showfor access with no or minimal notice (this affects Ms. Umeya’s work schedule, which is set sixweeks in advance and contemplates her working during access times), a failure to pay childsupport or s. 7 expenses on time, a failure to respond to questions when the child is in his care,and an overall resistance to negotiating with her on any contested matter. This has resulted inrepeated court appearances.

[19] Mr. Tebit, in turn, has his panoply of complaints about Ms. Umeya includingcancellations of access without notice, cancellations for illnesses that are suspect, infringementson his access time for things that Ms. Umeya deems more important (such as Sunday school ather mosque), a failure to communicate by phone or email when access is cancelled resulting inMr. Tebit having to call the police for assistance, a failure to sign birth certificate and change ofname forms as ordered, an insistence by Ms. Umeya that he contribute to the cost of Ensurewhen the child does not like it or need it, a lack of cooperation by Ms. Umeya when the child issick, a failure to make up missed access time or an offer of time that is not equal to what waslost, and a failure to promptly share health information about Rashard.

[20] Much of the two and a half days of evidence in this trial was taken up with a listing ofcomplaints by each party about the other. It is against this background that Ms. Umeya seeks tomove to Belleville with her son. She views it as a necessary change to ensure he has betterhousing, his own room, a backyard and support from her family. Mr. Tebit does not see it thatway at all. He testified that the move would greatly impact his relationship with his son and thatspending hours of driving is not quality access time.
The Move to Belleville

[15] Mr. Tebit is 53 years old. He is a self-employed clinical research consultant. His hoursand income vary depending on the number and types of projects he is working on. He worksmostly from home and has some flexibility with his work hours.

[21]
Ms. Umeya testified that until March 2017, she had been living in a small one-bedroomapartment at 3 Biggin Court in Toronto. Once Rashard got older, she gave up her bedroom tohim and slept on the couch in the living room. The apartment is too small for her to have any ofher son’s friends over to play. Further, the rent has gone up by $200 to $990 in the last two yearsand she has no control over future increases. There is no storage area, so all of her son’s toysincluding his bicycle and scooter must be stored inside the apartment. Her evidence was that Mr.Tebit is well aware of the challenges of this space. Much of the lump sum child and spousalsupport Ms. Umeya received in accordance with the December 2015 judgment went to pay legalfees and personal loans from family members. Further, Ms. Umeya’s work was not as flexible asshe had hoped. Management had changed after she returned from maternity leave and were notas understanding. She could not always get the shifts she wanted.

[22] Around April 2016, Ms. Umeya decided that for the sake of her son she needed a newliving and working arrangement. She began to look around for a larger apartment or house torent. She was shocked to find that a two-bedroom apartment would cost her a minimum of $1700
per month plus parking and laundry. A friend at work suggested she was better off to buy ahouse and pay a mortgage if she was going to pay that much. So Ms. Umeya contacted a realestate agent and started to look at homes in the Toronto area. She determined that her purchaseprice budget was a maximum of $400,000. It proved impossible to find something reasonableand within her budget in the Toronto area so she expanded her search to North York, Bramptonand Ajax. When she was still unsuccessful at finding something within her price range, she keptexpanding her search east until she found a home in Belleville.

[23] Ms. Umeya repeated several times during her evidence that she can no longer afford tolive in Toronto. Not only is her income modest, but the fact that she has had to expendsignificant sums for legal fees to pursue appropriate amounts of support from Mr. Tebit and thefact that he is consistently late with his payment of support and s. 7 expenses has meant that agreat deal of the financial burden associated with raising Rashard has been placed on hershoulders. In contrast, she points out how Mr. Tebit bragged at trial about how many toys he hadbought for Rashard, how he takes him to his private tennis club and how he believes that privateschool at more than $18,000 a year is a viable option for Rashard. Ms. Umeya told the court thatshe was recently evicted from her apartment as she could not afford to pay both rent and themortgage in Belleville. She has had to resort to payday loans and living in one bedroom of arelative’s home while awaiting the result of this hearing.

[24] The home in Belleville is a newly constructed three-bedroom with a finished basementand a backyard, located at 157B Cannifton Road North. It was priced at $389,000, within Ms.Umeya’s affordable limit. Ms. Umeya was unable to qualify for a mortgage on her own so hersister-in-law (“Sabra”) helped her. The home was purchased in October 2016. Title was placed inSabra’s name and a trust agreement prepared. A deposit of $18,500 was paid. Ms. Umeyatestified that this amount came from her own funds as well as gifts from her family. Sabra tookout a first mortgage on the home for approximately $307,000 and secured a second mortgage inthe amount of approximately $61,000 against her own home.

[26] Ms. Umeya spoke with a great deal of emotion about what this home would mean for herson. There would be room to store his bicycle and scooter. They would be within walkingdistance to amenities, a community centre and schools. He could have friends over, a study andplay area of his own, and a pet, which he has been asking for. The plan would be for her father tomove in with her and Rashard so that he can help her when she is unable to pick up Rashard ortake him to activities because of work.

[27] Other benefits of living at this location include easy access to the 401 and what Ms.Umeya estimates is a 20 percent reduction in overall costs including daycare, activities andgeneral expenses. Ms. Umeya has investigated public schools in the area and there is one tenminutes away from her house. She has also investigated daycares and found two good prospectsnearby. Both daycares cost 20 percent less than what she is paying for daycare in Toronto.

[28] With respect to her work, Ms. Umeya had secured a job in Belleville but she was let goprior to the end of her probation period. She found it impossible to balance the commute andcaring for Rashard while still living in Toronto. She is currently working approximately 75 hoursevery two weeks at Humber River Hospital in Toronto. Her evidence was that the Torontomarket is flooded with nurses. Her plan to upgrade her education and obtain her RN designationhas been sidelined by raising Rashard. She is aware that there are many more opportunities fornurses outside the GTA. She is also confident that she can obtain a job that would allow her theflexibility of being able to take her son to school in the morning and pick him at after-school carewhen she is finished work.

[29] Much evidence was given during this motion about the driving time between Toronto andBelleville. Ms. Umeya testified that the distance was 177 kilometres one way and the drivingtime was 1.5 hours or less. Mr. Tebit disagreed about the driving time and said he thought itcould take him up to three hours one way in winter weather. Ms. Umeya offered to share thedriving but Mr. Tebit was obviously concerned about, for example, how he would spend qualitytime on Thursday evening with his son when most of the time would be taken up with driving hisson between Toronto and Belleville.

[30] Ms. Umeya’s solution to this dilemma is to offer access at different times. Her plan, untilthe child goes to school in September 2017, is to maintain alternate weekend access from Fridayat 3:00 p.m. to Monday at 9:00 a.m. Ms. Umeya would drive Rashard to Toronto on Friday andMr. Tebit would bring him to Belleville for daycare on Monday morning. Mr. Tebit would alsohave access on Tuesdays, when he would pick up Rashard from daycare at 3:00 p.m. and drophim off at an agreed-upon location at 6:00 p.m. On the weeks when Ms. Umeya has Rashard onthe weekend, Mr. Tebit would also have access on Thursdays, when he would pick up Rashardfrom daycare at 3:00 p.m. and return him to an agreed-upon location at 6:00 p.m.

[25] Ms. Umeya is responsible for the mortgage payment of $1,900 per month plus realtytaxes. She has been paying these amounts with help from her family. Once she is back on herfeet, she intends to take over full responsibility for these costs and ultimately have the housetransferred to her name.

[31] Ms. Umeya proposes that once the child is in school, Mr. Tebit’s access would change totake place on alternate weekends from Friday after school to Sunday at 6:00 p.m. Mr. Tebitwould also have an additional access weekend every second month with the same start and endtimes. The child would spend half of the Christmas Break and half of the March Break as well astwo non-consecutive weeks during the summer with Mr. Tebit. The balance of the holidayschedule would be as per the December 2015 judgment.

[32] Ms. Umeya gave evidence that she is willing to share the driving with Mr. Tebit. Mr.Tebit would also be invited to attend the child’s activities when he visits him during the week.

[33] Mr. Tebit has no interest in Ms. Umeya’s proposed plan. In his view, such a plan wouldhave a seriously detrimental effect on his relationship with his son. He points out that his son haslived in Toronto his entire life. Further, neither he nor Ms. Umeya knows anyone in Belleville.
Rashard would give up his Toronto friends and connections. As well, Ms. Umeya does not havea job in Belleville. If she continues to work at Humber River Hospital, what is the point ofmoving?

[34] Mr. Tebit also points out that he had not heard of the trust agreement until it wasproduced on the eve of trial. However, he appears to have been aware of the agreement as hehad requested a copy of it well before trial. The late production meant he was not able to callwitnesses such as the other party to the trust agreement. Further, the agreement does not haveany provision as to a future transfer to Ms. Umeya or what happens in the event of her default ofpayment.

[35] In terms of Ms. Umeya’s financial situation, Mr. Tebit complains that she did not providean updated financial statement prior to trial as required by the Family Law Rules, she did notprovide proof of her search for accommodation or jobs in Toronto and the surrounding area nordid she provide a budget of her proposed expenses in Belleville for the purposes of comparison.
Mr. Tebit’s position is that Ms. Umeya has simply repeated over and over that she cannot affordto live in Toronto but has not provided adequate proof that that is actually the case.

[36] Mr. Tebit’s plan builds on the shared parenting arrangement that Myers J. referred to asthe future goal for parenting in this case. Mr. Tebit proposes a 2/2/3 rotating schedule withtransfers taking place at daycare or school. This would allow Ms. Umeya to maximize heremployment opportunities and allow Rashard to spend quality time with both parents. Mr. Tebittestified that he has investigated Bayview Glen Independent School (“BGS”), a private co-edschool that educates students from pre-school to Grade 12. Mr. Tebit has offered to pay the firsttwo years of tuition for the private school ($18,000 for Junior Kindergarten and $22,500 forSenior Kindergarten) and share the cost of tuition proportionally thereafter. Ms. Umeya statedthat she cannot afford private school on her income and wondered how Mr. Tebit is able topropose it based on what he says his income is.
The Legal Test

[37]
The jurisdiction for the court to grant the relief sought by Ms. Umeya is found in s. 17 ofthe Divorce Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp.), which permits a court to vary a custody order on

[38] Case law has, of course, developed in the area of “mobility cases” such as this. Theleading case is Gordon v. Goertz1 in which the Supreme Court of Canada articulated theprinciples to be considered when determining whether moving a child to a location that willaffect the access of the other parent should be permitted.

[39]

The test is best set out in the headnote of Gordon2 as follows:
A parent applying for a change in a custody order must first establish that therehas been a material change in the circumstances affecting the child since thecustody order was made. As an application to vary custody cannot be used as anindirect way to appeal from the initial custody order, the judge must assume thecorrectness of the initial order, and consider only the change in circumstancessince that time.
Once this threshold test has been met, the judge must then conduct a fresh inquiryinto what is in the best interests of the child. This inquiry is to be based on thefindings of the judge who made the initial custody order and evidence of the newcircumstances, but such an inquiry does not begin with any presumption in favourof the custodial parent, although that parent’s views are entitled to great respect.
The only issue at this point is the best interests of the child, not the interests orrights of the parents.
The particular factors to be considered are the existing custody and accessarrangements, the relationship between the child and the custodial parent andaccess parent, the desirability of maximizing contact between the child and bothparents, the views of the child, and the disruption to the child of a change incustody or consequent on removal from his or her present community. Thecustodial parent’s reason for moving is also a factor, but only in the exceptionalcase where it is relevant to that parent’s ability to meet the needs of the child.

[40] One must review the decision of Gordon with s. 24(2) of the Children’s Law Reform Act,R.S.O. 1990, c. C.12 and ss. 16(8) and (10) and s. 17(9) of the Divorce Act. Subsection 24(2) ofthe Children’s Law Reform Act reads as follows:
BEST INTERESTS OF CHILD
24(2) The court shall consider all the child’s needs and circumstances, including,

1
2

[1996] 2 S.C.R. 27, 134 D.L.R. (4th) 321.
At 1996 CarswellSask 199.

application by either party. Subsection 17(9) requires that in determining such an application, thecourt must consider that a child should have as much contact as possible with each parent inaccordance with the child’s best interests.

the love, affection and emotional ties between the child and,
(i)

each person, including a parent or grandparent, entitled toor claiming custody of or access to the child,

(ii)

other members of the child’s family who reside with thechild, and

(iii)

persons involved in the child’s care and upbringing;

(b)

the child’s views and preferences, if they can reasonably beascertained;

(c)

the length of time the child has lived in a stable home environment;

(d)

the ability and willingness of each person applying for custody ofthe child to provide the child with guidance and education, thenecessaries of life and any special needs of the child;

(e)

the plan proposed by each person applying for custody of or accessto the child for the child’s care and upbringing;

(f)

the permanence and stability of the family unit with which it isproposed that the child will live;

(g)

the ability of each person applying for custody of or access to thechild to act as a parent; and

(h)

any familial relationship between the child and each person who isa party to the application.

[41] A number of cases following Gordon have enunciated further guiding principles for thecourt. Those include determinations that Gordon applies to both joint and sole custody cases,3
that the maximum contact principle is not absolute and remains only one factor in the analysis,4
and that the court will consider the type of accommodation available as a result of the move
(such as the child having his or her own bedroom). 5

[42] Courts have been critical of parents who engage in self-help by obtaining newaccommodation and then asking the court to permit a change.6 As well, courts have denied relief

3

Young v. Young (2003), 63 O.R. (3d) 112, 223 D.L.R. (4th) 113 (C.A.).
Bjornson v. Creighton (2002), 62 O.R. (3d) 236, 221 D.L.R. (4th) 489 (C.A.), at para. 34.
5
Johnson v. Cleroux (2002), 23 R.F.L. (5th) 176, 156 O.A.C. 197 (C.A.), at paras. 6, 8.
6
Hazelwood v. Hazelwood, 2012 ONSC 5069, [2012] O.J. No. 4274, at paras. 55-59.
4

(a)

[43] Applying Gordon, subsequent case law and the relevant legislation to the facts of thiscase, I make the following findings.
Material Change

[44] As per Gordon, at para. 13, it is Ms. Umeya’s onus to establish that there has been “(1) achange in the condition, means, needs or circumstances of the child and/or the ability of theparents to meet the needs of the child; (2) which materially affects the child; and (3) which waseither not foreseen or could not have been reasonably contemplated by the judge who made theinitial order.”

[45] Mr. Tebit’s counsel argues that there has been no material change. First, Ms. Umeyatestified in the December 2015 trial that she was contemplating a move so the move cannot havebeen “unforeseen.” Second, Ms. Umeya has failed to provide evidence of her financialdifficulties following the December 2015 trial, including an updated financial statement,documentation relating to her searches for housing and employment in Toronto or a budget forBelleville. Finally, Ms. Umeya’s financial circumstances following the December 2015 trialwere better than they had been because Mr. Tebit paid lump sums of both child and spousalsupport arrears. It was only after her decision to move to Belleville that her financial situationbecame strained while she tried to maintain two homes.

[46] While Mr. Tebit’s counsel makes good points I am not convinced that the evidence isinsufficient for the material change threshold to be met. First, while Ms. Umeya stated that shewould likely need more space after Rashard was born, this does not mean that the fact that shewould have to move out of the GTA could have been foreseeable, both because she may not havebeen aware of the market and because of the changes in the market between 2015 and thepresent. As for documentation regarding Ms. Umeya’s searches for housing and employment, I
take judicial notice of the difficult state of housing in the City of Toronto. It is unique in thecountry. In short, the supply of both rental housing and single-family homes for sale is low andprices are ever increasing. Add to that the fact that Ms. Umeya was not in a rent-controlledpremises, and it is clear that her concerns about future housing for her and her son cannot bedismissed.

[47] Ms. Umeya is a registered practical nurse. Her past history shows that she has alwaysworked. She has not been unemployed because she could not find a job but only because of hermaternity leave. When the job in Belleville could not work because of her circumstances, she

7
8

P. (W.C.) v. P. (C.), 2005 BCCA 60, 40 B.C.L.R. (4th) 163, at para. 19.
Elliott v. Elliott, 2009 ONCA 240, 64 R.F.L. (6th) 1, at para 18.

to parties who were found to have ‘spent their way’ into a change of circumstances which forcedthe move7 or where the move would change the nature of access because of the large amount ofdriving time involved.8

[48] What Ms. Umeya did provide was a copy of her eviction notice and applications forpayday loans. Further, I accept her evidence that the majority of her lump sum support awardedpost-trial was used to pay legal fees and repay loans from friends and family used to get herthrough the trial process. Based on the evidence of both parties, their legal fees have beensubstantial and I accept that even with the lump sum payments, Ms. Umeya was not much betteroff after she paid her debts.

[49] Therefore, I do not find that Ms. Umeya has spent her way into a material change. If sheis unsuccessful on this motion, she will get back on her feet and do her best as she always has.
Her current state of financial disarray has resulted from a number of circumstances, includinglegal fees, trying to meet her financial obligations with respect to the home in Belleville, andmaintaining basic expenses for herself and the child. She does not have the option of writing offcar, gas and meal expenses like Mr. Tebit.

[50] Could Ms. Umeya have managed the situation better? I find that she could have. It wouldhave been better if she had brought her Motion to Change earlier and well before the Bellevillepurchase. However, I accept her evidence that she did not really understand the process ofbringing a Motion to Change while self-represented and that her interpretation of the judgmentwas that she could not move out of Canada but she could move anywhere within Canada. Withthe benefit of counsel, she is now clear on these former misconceptions.

[51] The question is, then, whether Ms. Umeya’s circumstances have changed in a mannerthat materially affects the child and could not have been foreseen. I do not find that the currentcircumstances could have been foreseen by Ms. Umeya. She gave up her bedroom when thechild grew out of infancy and the small apartment began to feel even smaller as Rashard’s toysbecame bigger (bicycles and scooters) and he became bigger. The difference between a twoyear-old (Rashard’s age at trial) and a four-year-old (Rashard’s current age) is significant interms of development and needs. Ms. Umeya started her search with apartments. At first, sheplanned to move to a two-bedroom apartment. That was not so simple given the supply and theprice.

[52] Overall, Ms. Umeya’s search for housing that would allow her son his own room and aspace to study (as he has at his father’s home) proved to be an exercise in frustration. It cannot bea surprise to anyone that the apartment supply was low and expensive and that her budget for ahome at $400,000 took her far out of the GTA.

[53] This is also not a case, like many, where Ms. Umeya is seeking a change because she hasfound a new partner and wants to establish a life with him elsewhere. Her motivation for themove is related purely to Rashard’s growing needs. Further, I do not view this as Ms. Umeya

went back to Humber River Hospital where she resumed full-time hours without any problem.
She is not moving for employment reasons. Ms. Umeya, with her education and experience, iseminently employable. I accept her evidence, however, that there is greater need for nursesoutside the GTA and she has a chance of obtaining a job with more flexibility. She did not,however, rely on this prospect as the sole reason for her move.

[54] In summary, I find that Ms. Umeya’s housing needs for her son have resulted in amaterial change in circumstances. The small one-bedroom apartment they were residing in wasno longer reasonable given that Rashard would be starting school and needing his own properspace. The results of Ms. Umeya’s housing search were also not unreasonable given the currentstate of the Toronto housing market. She sought a long-term arrangement for the child. Thelocation of Belleville is not in itself significant. I infer that Ms. Umeya would have movedwherever she could have found a house within her budget.

[55] As for the foreseeability of the change, the focus of the trial in 2015 appeared to bemostly financial and the parties’ living circumstances were not discussed in the judgment. Giventhe progression of access to two weeknights plus alternate weekends, it seems reasonable that thetrial judge expected the parties to live within a reasonable distance of one another or such accesswould not have feasible.
Best Interests

[56] Some factors in the consideration of best interests are beyond dispute in this case. First,both parents having a loving relationship with their son and there is no issue that their care of thechild when with either of them is beyond reproach. There was no evidence of Rashard’s wishesin this case. Even if there had been, I would give them little weight because he is only four.
Videos of him presented to the court showed a happy, healthy, energetic little boy whose focuswas far from the battleground of his parents. And finally, there is no doubt that a move toBelleville would disrupt Rashard somewhat and would affect the current access schedule.

[57] In this case, any move would have to ensure maximum contact with Mr. Tebit and evenmove towards the shared parenting mentioned by Myers J.

[58] In my view, it would be in Rashard’s best interests to move to Belleville with his motherin consideration of the following factors:
(a)

A move to Belleville would allow Rashard to have his own bedroom, study areaand play area at his mother’s home, just as he has at his father’s home.

(b)

I accept Ms. Umeya’s evidence that her father would live in the home with herand provide much needed support in the event that Rashard needs to be taken toan activity or to school in the event she is working. Ms. Umeya complained, and I
accept, that it created problems for her at work when she had to take time offwhen the child was sick or when Mr. Tebit cancelled access with minimal notice.

(c)

The lower cost of living in Belleville and the certainty of expenses that comeswith home ownership (of a new home, at least) would allow Ms. Umeya afinancial stability that would benefit the child.

putting her needs ahead of those of her son. Indeed, she has already put his needs ahead of hersby sleeping on the couch and allowing him the only bedroom.

9

(d)

Mr. Tebit would not have the same access schedule as before but one could befashioned that would allow maximum contact but at different times. I reject Ms.Umeya’s proposed schedule. It does not promote the maximum contact principleand is rife with problems in terms of where the parties would meet for exchanges.

(e)

Ms. Umeya’s significant contribution to driving would assuage Mr. Tebit’sconcerns about much of his access time being spent in the car.

(f)

Ms. Umeya is the child’s primary caregiver. Her views about what is best for thechild must be respected; however, this is only one factor, and not theoverwhelming factor in determining this child’s best interests.

(g)

Mr. Tebit complained that the child would be disrupted because he will be losinghis friends and connections in Toronto. However, there was very little evidenceabout what those friends or connections were. In any event, Rashard will bestarting Junior Kindergarten in the fall and would be making an entirely new setof friends wherever he lived.

(h)

Rashard will still be able to see his half-brother, Brinley, during holidays. Brinleylives in the U.S. and only visits his father occasionally on holidays. Mr. Tebitgave no evidence about any other family members whose relationship withRashard would be impacted. Ms. Umeya, by contrast, indicated that her familywould be visiting her father in Belleville regularly as he is the family patriarchand the family is close.

(i)

Ms. Umeya has researched schools and daycares in the area that would besatisfactory to her. Mr. Tebit has not taken any steps to do so. His focus was onlyon BGS, a school far beyond these parties’ means, as I will set out below.

(j)

Neither of these parties has a new partner so there is no issue regarding anyrelationship between Rashard and a step-parent. Such relationships are oftenconsidered in the case law where the relationship between the child and the stepparent is a close one. See Wharton v. Prieur.9

(k)

Rashard is only four. He appears to have adjusted well to the gradually increasingaccess as per the December 2015 judgment. I see no reason why he cannot adjustto a new arrangement that will give him lots of quality weekend and summer timewith his father.

(l)

Each parent is critical of the other’s parenting. Without getting into all of themany complaints that each had about the other, I find that overall Ms. Umeya has

2015 ONSC 5129, [2015] O.J. No. 4316.

a somewhat better understanding and appreciation of Mr. Tebit’s parenting skills.
It was extremely telling that when asked in cross-examination if he thought Ms.Umeya was a good parent, Mr. Tebit’s response was that it “depends on how youdefine that.” He refused to concede that Ms. Umeya and Rashard had a closerelationship. His refusal to acknowledge that Ms. Umeya had any good parentingqualities is illustrative of how he approaches his dealings with her. I find that ifpermitted to move, Ms. Umeya will respect and understand that Mr. Tebit’s timewith Rashard must continue to be maximized.

[59] Mr. Tebit has provided a number of cases where proposed moves were rejected by thecourt. Some of these cases are factually quite different from this case. For example, in Porter v.
Bryan,10 the mother requested to move from Cochrane to Thunder Bay to obtain betteremployment. The driving distance between Cochrane and Thunder Bay is some eight hours.
While Mr. Tebit complains about the driving distance to Belleville, it cannot be compared to a16-hour round trip.

[60] In Stav v. Stav,11 the British Columbia Court of Appeal allowed the father’s appeal andthe children in that case were not permitted to move from Vancouver to Israel with their mother.
The court found that the trial judge had failed to give sufficient consideration to the eldest child’swish to remain in Vancouver and in treating the mother’s best interests as synonymous withthose of the children. In the case at bar, the child is too young to express a view. Further, as I
found previously, it is unlikely that Ms. Umeya would be moving at all had she not put her son’sinterests ahead of her own. This is not about a new job or a new partner for her, it is only aboutwhat is best for Rashard.

[61] Finally, in Vander Byl v. McLeod,12 the court refused to allow the mother to move thechildren from Alexandria, Ontario to Tamworth, Ontario. The court found it would be toodisruptive for the children as they had grown up with the paternal grandparents on their farm.
Their connections to the farm and their grandparents were significant. The court found that justbecause the mother was in a new relationship, she could not simply cut off the children’sconnection to their father, his parents and the farm. Those facts are, of course, very differentfrom this case. There was no evidence that Rashard had any similarly significant connection toMr. Tebit’s family. His connection to his half-brother, Brinley, is not comparable since Brinleyvisits his father only occasionally.

[62] Given all of the above, I find that a move to Belleville with Ms. Umeya would be inRashard’s best interests. However, a new access arrangement must be put in place to ensuremaximum contact with Mr. Tebit.

10

2017 ONSC 756, [2017] O.J. No. 601.
2012 BCCA 154, [2012] B.C.J. No. 673.
12
2012 ONSC 4857, [2012] O.J. No. 4526.
11

Section 7 Expenses

[64] Ms. Umeya insists that Mr. Tebit owes her $5,541.81 for s. 7 expenses since 2014. This ismade up of a combination of daycare costs, Ensure expenses, and prescription costs.

[65] Some explanation is required in relation to the Ensure expenses. Ms. Umeya’s evidenceduring this hearing and at the 2015 trial was that Rashard’s doctor wanted Rashard to take a dailysupplement. Ms. Umeya buys the product Ensure, which she says Rashard drinks daily andenjoys. Myers J. specified in his judgment that expenses for Ensure (at that time $150 per monthplus HST) were to be shared proportionally.

[66] Mr. Tebit does not believe that Rashard needs Ensure. He testified that the child did noteven like it. He conceded he has never contacted Rashard’s doctor to discuss the necessity ofcontinuing with the supplement. Ms. Umeya disagreed that the Ensure was unnecessary. Herview is that the doctor’s recommendation must be followed and she testified that while in hercare, Rashard drinks two or more bottles of Ensure per day.

[67] Given Mr. Tebit’s view about the necessity of this product, it is not surprising that he hasnot always been timely about his contribution towards its cost. Ms. Umeya testified that shesubmitted receipts for Ensure to FRO but that FRO told her they would not enforce these claims.
Mr. Tebit points to various additional amounts he paid to FRO in 2015. Exhibit 4 was an FRO
statement for the period of October 1, 2014 to March 16, 2017. Mr. Tebit’s evidence was thatFRO added the sum of $1,016.62 to the support he was required to pay in 2015 for payment of s.
7 expenses including Ensure. He made payments over and above his regular support paymentsduring the summer and fall of 2015 and had his support balance down to zero by November2015. Mr. Tebit did not provide any correspondence from FRO to confirm that the $1,016.62
amount on the FRO statement related to s. 7 expenses.

[68] Ms. Umeya testified that the adjustments shown in Exhibit 4 were for previous arrearsand that Mr. Tebit owes the amounts set out in the schedule she presented. She provided all ofthe receipts she relied on in her Document Brief. She stated that she has not provided receipts forEnsure in 2017 because Mr. Tebit never pays his share so she stopped keeping the receipts.

[69] Like many before me, I find FRO statements to be difficult to decipher. It is certainly notclear that the amount of $1,016.62 added to Mr. Tebit’s accounts for s. 7 expenses. What is clearis that $1,016.62 is the only “odd” amount shown outside of regular support payments and thelump sum arrears from December 2015.

[70] I have reviewed the receipts provided by Ms. Umeya. The daycare and prescriptionamounts from her schedule correspond exactly with what she sent to FRO.

[71] Mr. Tebit’s position, as per Exhibit 7, is that he has paid any outstanding amounts subjectto a small balance owing for recently produced Ensure receipts.

[63] There are two areas of dispute concerning s. 7 expenses: arrears owed by Mr. Tebit andthe cost of private school.

[73] It is not for the court to review every receipt for s. 7 expenses. I am prepared to allow Ms.Umeya s. 7 expenses for Ensure for 2014-2016 at $260 per year for a total of $780 for thosethree years. Ms. Umeya stopped sending receipts for Ensure in 2017 as Mr. Tebit simply wouldnot pay. However, as indicated above, s.7 expenses are not reimbursable without receipts.

[74]
The prescription, daycare and Ensure totals based on the chart provided by Ms. Umeyaand my findings would therefore be: a total of $1,259.88 for daycare in 2014 and 2015, plus atotal of $515 for Ensure ($780 x 66%) to March 31, 2017, plus a total of $300.93 forprescriptions in 2014-2015. This would total $2,075.81 I am prepared to allow Mr. Tebit a creditof $750. This number reflects partial acceptance of Mr. Tebit’s evidence that he has paid some s.
7 expenses to FRO and at the same time recognizes Ms. Umeya’s evidence that FRO refused toenforce s. 7 expenses. The court’s dilemma is that the FRO ledgers are incomprehensible but itdoes appear that certain unusual amounts were added to Mr. Tebit’s support obligations.

[75] Given all of the above, the net total owing by Mr. Tebit would be $1,325.81.This amountis to be paid forthwith and directly to Ms. Umeya by Mr. Tebit upon the release of this judgment.
Mr. Tebit is not obligated to pay his share for any future Ensure expenses without receipts.

[76] The other s. 7 expense in issue is the cost of BGS. Mr. Tebit believes it is important forRashard to attend a private school. BGS is located in the Leslie and York Mills area in Toronto.
Mr. Tebit offered to pay for the first two years and then share the cost of the remaining yearsproportionally. He suggested that he should receive a reduction in child support during the twoyears he is responsible for the private school fees.

[77] I do not intend to spend much time on this issue for two reasons. First, it is not feasiblefor Rashard to attend BGS when he will be moving to Belleville and attending school there.
Further, the cost of BGS (or frankly, any private school) is simply not affordable for these partiesgiven the financial information provided during this hearing. For example, by the time Ms.Umeya is asked to pay her share of private school expenses two years from now, the cost of BGS
would be at least $22,500 per year. This is the cost for Grade One in the 2017/18 academic yearand an increase in tuition can be expected in the intervening two years. This cost also does notinclude before- or after-school care or transportation.

[78] Based on these numbers, Ms. Umeya would be asked to contribute $6525 a year. Thistranslates to $544 per month. On a modest budget, she is already close to the line in terms ofbeing able to pay basic expenses. Adding another $544 per month to her expenses would beunreasonable and simply unaffordable for her.

[79] As for Mr. Tebit, his financial information is singularly unhelpful because it is based onhis income in 2015. Based on that information, his expenses exceed his income by over $3,000

[72] I have reviewed the receipts produced by Ms. Umeya for Ensure (or its equivalent) for2016. They total $261. This is not even close to the $1,225 claimed by Ms. Umeya for Ensure forthe same year. While Myers J. set out a specific amount for Ensure each month ($150), s. 7
expenses are not reimbursable without receipts.

per month. Unless his income has doubled in 2016 (and he could not provide any real specificsabout last year’s income), his ability to afford private school is closing in on a fantasy.

[80] As indicated above, Mr. Tebit has provided only outdated income information to thecourt on this hearing. During his evidence he said he thought his gross income for 2016 would beapproximately $150,000. He provided documents related to some expenses he had for hisbusiness but nothing to substantiate such an income. Given that Mr. Tebit, as a self-employedcontractor, is the one who would invoice his clients (presumably via the internet), it would seemto be a relatively straightforward exercise to produce those invoices as proof of what he billedlast year.

[81] Instead, the court is left with a financial statement showing his 2015 income asapproximately $65,000 and his expenses for that year at over $100,000.

[82] Mr. Tebit agrees that there is a personal component to the expenses he deducts from hisincome. The parties disagree on the percentage of the deduction attributable to personalexpenses. Given the amount of time spent on Mr. Tebit’s income and his failure to provide fullfinancial disclosure at the last trial and this hearing, Ms. Umeya suggests a “formula” fordetermining Mr. Tebit’s income. This would avoid having to return to court each year on thisissue. Ms. Umeya suggests that going forward, Mr. Tebit’s income for support purposes bedetermined as the greater of $150,000 or his line 150 income plus 75 percent of his businessexpenses added back and grossed up. Mr. Tebit’s view is that his income should be based on hisline 150 income plus 25 percent of his car expenses and 50 percent of his other businessexpenses added back and grossed up.

[83] Mr. Tebit’s proposed formula would apply to his 2015 income as follows. Mr. Tebit’sline 150 income for 2015 was $24,190.88. His business expenses (minus car expenses butincluding business use of home expenses) were $27,565.76 Fifty percent of that amount is
$13,782.88. Based on his income, his tax rate would be in the range of 12 percent, increasing theamount to be added back to $15,436.83. Twenty-five percent of his $13,151 in car expense
(including vehicle CCA) would be $3,287.75 grossed up by 12 percent would be $3,682.28.
Therefore the total to be added back would be $19,119.16 bringing Mr. Tebit’s notional incomefor support purposes in 2015 to $43,310.04.

[84] I am not prepared to accept $43,310.04 as Mr. Tebit’s income for support purposes forseveral reasons:
(a)

This is less than Ms. Umeya’s income and Mr. Tebit has always earned moreincome than her.

(b)

Such an amount is inconsistent with Mr. Tebit’s lifestyle including hisexpenditures on a private tennis club, expensive toys for Rashard, and the fact thathe bills his clients between $150 and $190 per hour.

Mr. Tebit’s Income for Support Purposes

(c)

The disclosure he has provided for his 2016 income is inadequate. The disclosurein Exhibit 5, Tab 38 is of little assistance. Since Mr. Tebit bills by the project orby the hour, surely he would have invoices for his work that could have beenproduced but were not. By the time of this hearing, we were already over threemonths into 2017 and Mr. Tebit’s vague protests that he wasn’t sure of his 2016
gross income but thought it might be in the range of $150,000 were difficult toaccept. I prefer the submission of Mr. Umeya’s counsel in this regard that Mr.Tebit strategically chose not to update his income information.

[85] Mr. Tebit’s financial statement sworn February 6, 2017 shows that his expenses exceededhis income by $36,192.56 in 2015. Yet, during this hearing Mr. Tebit testified about takingRashard to his private tennis club and the expensive toys he buys for him and he was confidenthe could afford private school in September 2017. Mr. Tebit’s documentary and oral testimonysimply don’t align. As such, and keeping in mind the findings made by Myers J., there is noreason not to impute income to Mr. Tebit of $100,000 for 2015.

[86] I am loathe to apply the formula proposed by Ms. Umeya for Mr. Tebit’s future incomefor two reasons. First, pegging his income at $150,000 if he earns $150,000 gross income isunfair because Mr. Tebit must incur expenses in order to earn this income. The other proposalmade by Ms. Umeya’s counsel – that Mr. Tebit’s income be based on his line 150 income withcertain amounts added back – may end up being unfair to Ms. Umeya. Even if the expenses wereadded back at 75 percent and then grossed up as suggested by Ms. Umeya’s counsel, that wouldput Mr. Tebit’s 2015 income in the range of $58,000 It would be difficult to accept that Mr.Tebit actually earns only slightly more than Ms. Umeya given the earning history of both.

[87] As such, I will impute income to Mr. Tebit for 2016 at $110,000. This factors in that theHST he collects forms part of his gross income and some reduction for expenses. This wouldresult in a support payment of $958 per month and arrears owing for January 2016 to May 2017
being $1,326 ($958-880 = $78 per month x 17 months = $1,326). This is to be adjusted andcollected by FRO.

[88] Mr. Tebit did not provide any significant information about his 2017 income although healso did not suggest that it was trending to be much different than 2016. As such, and tohopefully avoid further court appearances, Mr. Tebit’s income for 2017 shall also be imputed at
$110,000. If this amount proves to be grossly overstated, Mr. Tebit may bring a Motion toChange. If he does so, however, he must provide all invoices, billing and expense informationfor 2017 at the time of bringing his Motion to Change.

[89] Proportional sharing of s. 7 expenses shall remain at 68 percent for Mr. Tebit and 32
percent for Ms. Umeya in 2015. In 2016 and 2017 the proportional sharing of s. 7 expenses willbe based on Mr. Tebit’s income of $110,000 and Ms. Umeya’s income of $45,000. This is onlyan estimate of Ms. Umeya’s income as her second-last pay stub for 2016 showed she had onlyearned $41,000 up to December 15, 2016. Based on these numbers, the proportional sharing of s.
7 expenses would be 71 percent for Mr. Tebit and 29 percent for Ms. Umeya. However, giventhe amount of time and energy spent on dealing with s. 7 expenses in this case, there will be no

further adjustment to the amount of s. 7 expenses that Mr. Tebit is required to pay according tothe terms of this judgment. The new proportional sharing shall commence on April 1, 2017.

Given all of the above, the final order of Myers, J dated December 11, 2015 shall continue,except as amended herein:
(a)

Access shall remain as is until July 2, 2017. Ms. Umeya may move to Belleville ifshe wishes before July 2, 2017, but she will be required to do all the drivingnecessary to ensure that Mr. Tebit’s access remains the same until July 2, 2017.
That is, for example, on Thursday evenings, Mr. Tebit would pick up the childfrom daycare and Ms. Umeya would pick the child up from an agreed uponlocation and drive him home to Belleville when the access ends at 6:30 p.m.

(b)

Rashard shall remain in his current daycare until June 30, 2017.

(c)

As of Sunday July 2, 2017 the parties shall share time with Rashard on a weekabout basis for the summer of 2017 and each summer thereafter. Accessexchanges shall take place on Sunday evening at 7:00 p.m. except on longweekends they will take place on Monday at 7:00 p.m. By way of example, if theweekend of July 1 and 2, 2017 is Mr. Tebit’s weekend with the child, he shalldrive the child to an agreed-upon meeting place in Belleville for the exchange onSunday, July 2 at 7:00 p.m. Ms. Umeya would then have the child in her care untilSunday, July 9 and she would drive him to agreed-upon meeting place in Torontofor the exchange at 7:00 p.m. on that day. If the weekend of July 1 and 2, 2017 isMs. Umeya’s weekend, she shall drive the child to an agreed-upon meeting placein Toronto on Sunday, July 2 for an exchange at 7:00 p.m. and Mr. Tebit shalldrive the child to Belleville on Sunday, July 9 for an exchange at 7:00 p.m. Infuture years, the commencement of the summer week-about arrangement shallalways be the Sunday following Rashard’s last day of school.

(d)

Each party shall arrange and pay for any daycare they require during the summerof 2017 and every summer thereafter.

(e)

Ms. Umeya’s religious holidays are to be respected and the child is to be with heron those days. For example in 2017, Eid al-Fitr takes place from the evening ofJune 25 to the evening of June 26 and Eid al-Adha takes place from the eveningof August 31 to the evening of September 1. No matter what the regular accessschedule, the child is always to be with Ms. Umeya on these religious occasions.
If the child is not otherwise in her care, she is to pick up the child at 3:00 p.m. inToronto on the first day of the holiday and return the child to Toronto at 9:00 a.m.
on the morning after the second day of the holiday. On January 1 in each yearcommencing January 1, 2018, Ms. Umeya is to advise Mr. Tebit on which daysEid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha will take place in that year as the dates change eachyear.

Final Orders

(f)

Commencing Tuesday, September 5, 2017 and each September thereafter, theschool year access arrangement shall be as follows: The school year accessschedule shall commence on the Tuesday following Labour Day. If the summerweek ending with the Labour Day long weekend is Mr. Tebit’s week with thechild, Mr. Tebit will drop off the child in Belleville on Labour Day Monday at7:00 p.m. If the summer week ending with the Labour Day long weekend is Ms.Umeya’s week, the child shall remain with Ms. Umeya throughout the LabourDay long weekend and into the following week.
(iv)

The child shall reside with Mr. Tebit for the first three weekends of everymonth and with Ms. Umeya for the fourth weekend of every month. If amonth has five weekends, the child shall reside with Ms. Umeya for thefourth and fifth weekend of that month. If a month begins on a Sunday,that shall be considered the first weekend of the month.

(v)

The child shall reside with Ms. Umeya during the week.

(vi)

For the first and second weekend of each month, Ms. Umeya shall drivethe child to an agreed-upon meeting place in Toronto for 6:00 p.m. onFriday night. On these weekends, Ms. Umeya shall pick up the child onSunday night at 7:00 p.m. at an agreed-upon meeting place in Toronto. Inthe event that the first or second weekend of the month is a long weekend,access shall extend to the Monday at 7:00 p.m. and Ms. Umeya shall pickup the child in Toronto at 7:00 p.m. on the Monday.

(vii)

For the third weekend of each month, Ms. Umeya shall drive the child toan agreed-upon meeting place in Toronto for an exchange at 6:00 p.m. onFriday night. Mr. Tebit shall drive the child back to Belleville for anexchange on Sunday night at 7:00 p.m. If the third weekend of the monthis a long weekend, Mr. Tebit shall drive the child back to Belleville for anexchange on Monday night at 7:00 p.m.

(viii)

Rashard will spend the majority of the school Christmas Break with Mr.Tebit. The parties shall share the driving with Ms. Umeya droppingRashard off at an agreed-upon location in Toronto at 9:00 a.m. on theMonday morning after the last day of school before the Christmas Break
(even if the preceding weekend would otherwise be Mr. Tebit’s weekend)
and Mr. Tebit returning him to Ms. Umeya in Belleville at 6:00 p.m. thenight before the first day of school after the Christmas Break.

(ix)

The parties will share March Break with the changeover for March Breakbeing the Wednesday at noon. The parties shall share the driving forMarch Break.

(x)

There shall be a grace period of 30 minutes for pick-up and drop-off timesin the event of unforeseen weather or traffic issues.

(xi)

Given the distance of the parties, the provision allowing special accesstime on Mother’s Day, Father’s Day and a party’s birthday is no longerfeasible and will be discontinued.

(xii)

Given the new access arrangement, there shall be no alternating of theEaster or Thanksgiving holiday.

(xiii)

As well, given the distance of the parties, there will be no additionalaccess time for the parent who does not have Rashard on his birthday.
That parent must plan any birthday celebrations during their regular accesstime with the child.

(xiv)

Both parties shall be permitted to communicate with the child byFaceTime/Skype once a day while the child is in the other party’s care.

(xv)

The parties shall communicate in writing in a respectful manner via OurFamily Wizard. Mr. Tebit shall pay for the cost of Our Family Wizardsubscriptions for both parties each year. The parties may communicate bytext in the event that urgent communication is required.

(xvi)

Ms. Umeya shall arrange for before- and after-school daycare as requiredfor the child. Mr. Tebit shall sign any required documents to allow thechild to be registered at daycare. Mr. Tebit shall be listed as a daycarecontact (for both summer and before and after school daycare) and is freeto visit the daycare at any time. Ms. Umeya is to be listed as a daycarecontact for any summer daycare in which Mr. Tebit enrols the child. Thecost of before- and after-school daycare for the school year is to be sharedproportionally – 71 percent by Mr. Tebit and 29 percent by Ms. Umeya.
Mr. Tebit shall provide his daycare payment when due by Interac emailtransfer. If the daycare will not accept such an arrangement, Mr. Tebitshall make such other arrangement with the daycare to ensure that hispayments are never late.

(xvii) Ms. Umeya shall arrange to place Rashard in Harmony Public School (orany other elementary school of her choice close to her home) in Bellevillecommencing September 2017. Mr. Tebit shall sign any requireddocumentation to allow the child to be registered at such school inBelleville. Mr. Tebit is to be listed as a parent and emergency contact forthe child and shall be entitled to receive his own copies of any schoolrelated notices (report cards, information circulars, parent/teacher meetingschedules, etc.).
(xviii) Access is not to be cancelled for any reason unless the child is required tobe hospitalized. If the child is sick, the parent who has his care will dealwith the illness, take the necessary steps, and inform the other parent viaOFW. If the child requires prescription medication, the parent who has

(xix)

The cost of over-the-counter medications such as Aveeno (the exceptionbeing Ensure if a doctor states it is necessary, as discussed below) are notto be shared proportionally.

(g)

Ms. Umeya is to take Rashard to his family doctor within 30 days of the date ofrelease of this judgment to obtain the doctor’s advice as to whether Rashardcontinues to require a nutritional supplement such as Ensure. This informationmust be provided by the doctor in writing and is to be shared with Mr. Tebit. Ifthe doctor’s opinion is that Rashard no longer requires the supplement, Mr. Tebitshall not be required to contribute to the cost of Ensure or any similar product.

(h)

So long as the child’s doctor recommends a supplement to the child’s diet (suchas Ensure), Ms. Umeya is to provide copies of her receipts to Mr. Tebit on the lastday of each month and Mr. Tebit is to pay his proportionate share to Ms. Umeyadirectly within seven days of the production of the receipts.

(i)

Mr. Tebit shall pay directly to Ms. Umeya the sum of $1,866.91 forthwithrepresenting arrears of various s. 7 expenses including remaining daycare expensefor 2014 and 2015, Ensure expense to March 31, 2017 and prescriptions for 2014
and 2015.

(j)

Upon proof of payment of the abovementioned sum representing s. 7 arrears toMs. Umeya, the sealed envelope containing the signed documents for the changeof name and new birth registration of Rashard may be given to Mr. Tebit’scounsel to submit to the Ontario government for processing. Each party is entitledto receive their own original birth certificate.

(k)

Mr. Tebit’s income for 2016 and 2017 is imputed at $110,000. His child supportobligation shall increase from $880 per month to $958 per month commencingJanuary 1, 2016. The Family Responsibility Office shall adjust for the differencebetween support paid from January 1, 2016 to date.

(l)

The parties shall exchange copies of their income tax returns and Notice ofAssessment by June 1 in each year. Child support and s. 7 expenses shall beadjusted in accordance with the Child Support Guidelines and subject to thefindings in this judgment.

(m)

Commencing April 1, 2017, Mr. Tebit shall pay 71 percent of the s. 7 expensesand Ms. Umeya shall pay 29 percent. The new proportional sharing amounts arebased on imputed income to Mr. Tebit at $110,000 and Ms. Umeya’s estimated2016 income at $45,000.

care of the child shall buy the medication and receipts shall be reconciledbased on the proportional sharing set out herein every 90 days, that is,March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 each year.

[90]

(n)

There is to be no proportionate sharing of daycare expense during the summerwhen the parties are sharing time with Rashard. Each party is responsible forarranging for and paying for their own daycare during that party’s access weeks.

(o)

Once Ms. Umeya moves to Belleville it may not be feasible to have the childenrolled in activities to which he is taken by both parents. Therefore, each partymay register Rashard in any activity and be responsible for taking him to thatactivity during that party’s parenting time. The activity is not to interfere with theother parent’s time with the child. The parents are to exchange schedules for theactivities and the other parent is free to attend and observe the activity withnotice. The party enrolling the child shall be responsible for the cost of thatactivity.

(p)

Ms. Umeya shall ensure that all appointments for Rashard are made during herparenting time.

A support deduction order shall issue.

[91] Mr. Tebit’s request for police enforcement of access is dismissed. The changes to theaccess arrangement, it is hoped, will result in fewer cancellations and confrontations by bothparties.

[92]
The parties may provide written submissions on costs. The submissions shall be nolonger than two pages in length excluding any Offers to Settle or a Bill of Costs. Counsel shallsend their costs submissions directly to my assistant at therese.navrotski@ontario.ca. Costs aredue on a seven day turnaround with the Applicant’s submissions due seven days after the date ofrelease of this judgment, the Respondent’s submissions seven days after that, and any replyseven days following. If no costs submissions are received within 35 days of the date of thejudgment, costs shall be deemed to be settled.

Gilmore J.

Released: May 10, 2017

CITATION: Umeya v. Tebit, 2017 ONSC 2874
COURT FILE NO.: FS-13-386499-002
DATE: 20170510

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
AISHA UMEYA
Applicant
– and –
HUMPHREY TEBIT
Respondent

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Gilmore J.

Released: May 10, 2017

ONTARIO

