CITATION: Upper Canada District School Board v. Gilcig, 2017 ONSC 2904
COURT FILE NO.: CV 17-29
DATE: 2017/05/12

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

Upper Canada District School Board and
Patricia Brown
Plaintiffs )
– and –
James Gilcig o/a Seaway Media
Defendant

Kate Genest, Counsel for the Plaintiffs

Lawrence Greenspon and Tina Hill, Counselfor the Defendant

HEARD: April 28, 2017

LEROY J.
REASONS ON INTERIM INJUNCTION MOTION

Introduction

[1]

The plaintiffs seek an interim injunction compelling the defendant to remove twopublications posted on the internet under the auspices of the cornwallfreepress and toprohibit like publications pending trial. For ease of reference, those publications areappended.

Issue

[2]

The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees the right of freedom ofexpression and of the press. The right to free expression does not confer licence to ruinreputation. The dissemination of defamatory comments that discredit an individual in theestimation of right-thinking members of society generally is actionable in damages.

ONTARIO

[3]

For the plaintiffs to succeed on this motion, their burden is to establish that this actionwill almost certainly succeed.
An injunction should only issue where thewords complained of are so manifestly defamatory that any jury verdict to the contrarywould be considered perverse by the Court of Appeal.

[4]

There are dangers in making a preliminary assessment of merits. Those dangers areheightened in a case involving restraint of future defamation where the cogency thresholdis very high. A finding that a party has satisfied this onus necessarily connotes thathe/she/it is very, very likely to succeed at trial.

Factual Overview

[5]

A resident of Cornwall who conducted weekly musical practices at a local secondaryschool deposed that he attended the school on four occasions in October 2013 and eachtime observed two swastikas on school walls. He telephoned the principal to notify herafter the first view on October 3rd. He re-attended on October 10, 2013 and observed twoswastikas in the same location. He called the principal again. He states the principal’sresponse was “she did not get to it”. He states the principal did not say that the swastikaswere removed and re-drawn. He re-attended on October 17th and noticed the swastikasagain. In paragraph 6 of his affidavit, the witness states: This time, I went to see Ms.Brown personally to notify her that the swastikas were still there. She said that she had alot of things to take care of and that she doesn’t go to the boys’ washroom. She assuredme it would be taken care of. She never told me that the swastikas had been removed andhad re-appeared.

[6]

The resident returned to the school on October 18 th with the defendant James Gilcig,observed swastikas on the wall and they attended the principal’s office. They met withthe vice-principal in Ms. Brown’s absence and informed him of the situation as they sawit. The vice-principal is credited with ensuring the swastikas were covered over within anhour.

[7]

By the defendant’s accounting, this graffiti could have been known to the plaintiff Brownfor fifteen days in total or ten school days before action was taken for its removal.

[8]

The plaintiff, Ms. Brown deposed that on or about October 3, 2013 she learned someonehad drawn graffiti depicting swastikas on the school boys’ washroom wall. Sheimmediately instructed maintenance staff to remove the graffiti and it was removed.

[9]

On October 10th , she learned that the swastika images were re-drawn. She immediatelyinstructed that the images be immediately removed and they were.

[10]

She learned from the vice-principal that James Gilcig attended the school on October 18thto complain about swastika graffiti in the boys’ washroom. In her absence, the viceprincipal instructed maintenance to remove the graffiti and it was.

[11]

The same graffiti reappeared several times and was removed by maintenance staff inaccordance with Ms. Brown’s instruction.

2

[12]

Ms. Brown conducted an investigation to identify the person(s) responsible for thegraffiti. The student was identified and disciplined.

[13]

Ms. Brown conducted a school-wide educational event on November 12, 2013 to educatethe student body about the Holocaust and the importance of combating racism,intolerance, hate and discrimination. She solicited a Holocaust survivor to speak to thestudent body about her experiences.

[14]

She expressed her sentiments with the words:…we are saddened and truly sorry thatthese incidents occurred in our school and more importantly that the use of swastikas stilloccurs in our society. It is our hope that as a school community, we will raise awarenessand care about this important issue.

[15]

Ms. Brown deposed that the defendant James Gilcig attended the assembly and sat in thefront row.

[16]

Beginning October 18, 2013, Mr. Gilcig began publishing articles under the auspices ofcornwallfreenews and the jewishtribune that the plaintiffs concluded were defamatory.
The impugned publications were released on October 18, 2013, October 21, 2013,January 31, 2014, February 7, 2014 and February 25, 2014. The plaintiffs made repeatedrequests of the defendant to remove the 2013 and 2014 publications.

[17]

The plaintiffs commenced an action against the defendant on April 22, 2014. Thedefendant delivered a statement of defence on June 13, 2014. The defendant publishedtwo further impugned articles on January 27, 2015 and March 1, 2015. The action settledin July 2015. The defendant withdrew the impugned publications and the plaintiffsconsented to an order dismissing their claim without costs.

[18]

Plaintiffs’ counsel communicated the “other side of the story” to the defendant onFebruary 20, 2014, as follows: “Specifically, when Ms. Brown received notice of theappearance of swastikas in the boys’ washroom, she and the school took immediate stepsto remove the graffiti as soon as reasonably possible. Unfortunately, the incidentreoccurred several times, each time requiring removal, performed by the custodianpursuant to Ms. Brown’s instructions. At the same time, Ms. Brown and the school tookinvestigative steps to identify the perpetrator. Through their diligent efforts, the studentwho was committing these acts was identified and appropriately disciplined.”

[19]

The defendant resumed public rebuke aimed at the plaintiffs over the events of October2013 in March 2017. The first publication issued in the cornwallfreepress on March 2,2017. Counsel for the plaintiffs demanded withdrawal. Mr. Gilcig complied. Mr. Gilcigresumed on March 20 and 27, 2017 respectively. Those publications remain posted onthe cornwallfreepress site. They are the subject of this motion for interim injunctiverelief.

[20]

Mr. Gilcig denies making false and defamatory allegations against the defendants. Herelies on the defences of truth, fair comment, and public interest responsible journalism.

3

4

Governing Principles

[21]

The general test for an interim injunction is well known. Originally set out in AmericanCyanamid Co. v. Ethicon Ltd., [1975] A.C. 396, [1975] 1 All E.R. 504 (H.L.), andaffirmed and further refined in RJR-MacDonald Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General), 1994First, there must be a preliminary assessment of the merits of the case to ensurethere is a serious question to be tried. The threshold is generally a low one. Insome instances this is elevated to require a strong prima facie case.
Second, it must be shown that the applicant would suffer irreparable harm if theinjunction was not granted.
Third, the balance of convenience must be assessed - that is, pending trial, whichparty would suffer greater harm from the granting or refusal of the injunction?

[22]

In defamation cases, the test is modified.

[23]
(SCC), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 626, 157 D.L.R. (4th ) 385, the majority ruled thatthe Cyanamid test is inappropriate to circumstances involving restraint of defamatoryutterances. The Cyanamid test is designed primarily to apply to disputes arising in thecommercial context. The Supreme Court approved Rapp v. McClelland & StewartLtd. (1981), 1981 CanLII 2906 (ON SC), 34 O.R. (2d) 452, 128 D.L.R. (3d) 650 (Ont.
H.C.), at pages 455-56:
The guiding principle then is, that the injunction should only issue where thewords complained of are so manifestly defamatory that any jury verdict to the contrarywould be considered perverse by the Court of Appeal. To put it another way, where it isimpossible to say that a reasonable jury must inevitably find the words defamatory, theinjunction should not issue.
... American Cyanamid ... has not affected the well-established principle in cases of libelthat an interim injunction should not be granted unless the jury would inevitably come tothe conclusion that the words were defamatory.
Justice Bastarache approved the following statement of the test from Injunctions andSpecific Performance (2nd ed. 1992 (loose-leaf)), Robert Sharpe says the following, atparas. 5.40-5.70 (pp. 5.2-5.4):

Interim Injunction

5

The well-established rule is that an interlocutory injunction will not be grantedwhere the defendant indicates an intention to justify [i.e. prove the truth of] thestatements complained of, unless the plaintiff is able to satisfy the court at theinterlocutory stage that the words are both clearly defamatory and impossible tojustify.
. . . it seems clear that the rule is unaffected by the American Cyanamid case andthat the balance of convenience is not a factor.

[24]

Recently, Justice Corbett in reasons for decision in Dale and Lessman LLP v. Atas, 2016
ONSC 5911at paras 28 and 29 wrote:
28 In cases where the plaintiffs seek to restrain speech, the test on the merits ismore stringent. Where a defendant has pleaded the defence of justification,appellate courts have held that the plaintiff must establish a high degree ofcertainty that it will succeed on the issue of liability. The precise formulation ofthe test is not entirely clear, with some dicta going so far as to suggest that onlywhere it is "impossible" for the defendant to justify the words that they should berestrained on an interlocutory basis.
29 This requirement has been interpreted contextually in some of the cases, andin my view that approach is the correct one: all of the circumstances of the casemust be considered in order to decide if the plaintiff's case is strong enough towarrant an interlocutory injunction citing Canadian Liberty and Palen vDagenais, 2012 SKQB 383.

Summary

[25]

An injunction to restrain defamation pending trial may not issue where the defendantdemonstrates his intention to attempt to justify (by proving the truth of) his paststatements, unless the plaintiff can show the Court at this stage that the words are clearlydefamatory and impossible to justify.

[26]

Although the test to obtain an injunction to restrict free speech is high, it is notinsurmountable. The plaintiff must show the case at trial is close to ironclad. This factorsin the defendant’s ability to justify the words complained of.

Defamation

[27]

Defamation is communication about a person that tends to hurt the person’s reputation. Itcauses the reader to think less of the person.

There is a significant public interest in the free and uncensored circulation ofinformation and the important principle of freedom of the press to be safeguarded.
...

6

[28]

As noted, the defences pleaded include truth (justification), fair comment and publicinterest responsible journalism/responsible communication on matters of public interest.

[29]

A true statement may hurt a person’s reputation. If the defendant can prove on a balanceof probabilities that the statement is true, the defence is made out.

[30]

Fair comments made honestly and in good faith on matters of public interest are protectedagainst an action for defamation, unless made maliciously. The statement must be one ofcomment and not of fact, and in order to be fair, it must be an objectively honestexpression of opinion on facts which are true and known to the persons to whom thecomment is made. Where the comment imputes evil, base or corrupt motives, it mustalso be shown that such imputations are warranted by the facts and be drawn by areasonable person. The public interest may be shown by the importance of the personabout whom the comment is made, or because of the interest generated by the event,occasion or circumstances giving rise to the comment – Brown on Defamation (Canada,United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, United States), Second Edition Chapter1(1.5)(2)(f).

[31]

Journalists may report statements and allegations – even if not true – if there is a publicinterest in distributing the information to a wide audience. This defence is contextual,having regard to all the circumstances and applies when the news was urgent, serious andof public importance and the journalist used reliable sources and tried to get and reportthe other side of the story.

[32]

The basis for this defence derives from the Supreme Court ruling in Grant v.
Torstar Corp. 2009 SCC 61 where the context was depicted as freewheeling debate onmatters of public interest is to be encouraged and the vital role of the communicationsmedia in providing a vehicle for such debate is explicitly recognized in the text of s. 2(b)
itself. While the law must protect reputation, a regime of strict liability is not justifiable.
The law of defamation accords no protection for statements on matters of public interestpublished to the world at large if they cannot be proven to be trueTo be protected by the defence of responsible communication, first, the publication mustbe on a matter of public interest. Second, the defendant must show that publication wasresponsible, in that he or she was diligent in trying to verify the allegation(s), havingregard to all the relevant circumstances. Paras 95, 98, 99.
In determining whether a publication is on a matter of public interest, the judge mustconsider the subject matter of the publication as a whole. The defamatory statementshould not be scrutinized in isolation. To be of public interest, the subject matter must beshown to be one inviting public attention, or about which the public, or a segment of thepublic, has some substantial concern because it affects the welfare of citizens, or one towhich considerable public notoriety or controversy has attached. Public interest is not

Defences to defamation

7

If public interest is shown, the jury decides whether, on the evidence, the defence ofresponsible communication is established. The following factors may aid in determiningwhether a defamatory communication on a matter of public interest was responsiblymade: (a) the seriousness of the allegation; (b) the public importance of the matter; (c) theurgency of the matter; (d) the status and reliability of the source; (e) whether theplaintiff’s side of the story was sought and accurately reported; (f) whether the inclusionof the defamatory statement was justifiable; (g) whether the defamatory statement’spublic interest lay in the fact that it was made rather than its truth (“reportage”); and (h)
any other relevant circumstances. Paras 110, 126, 128.
Principles applied

[33]

There are circumstances when discretion is the better part of valour.
follow, I conclude this is such a circumstance for the defence.

For the reasons that

[34]

The defence assertions inherently serve to discredit the plaintiffs’ reputations in theestimation of right-thinking members of society generally.
The plaintiffs serve anintegral role in the function of the community with heavy reliance on their collectivesense of liberalism, judgment, transparency and competence. The characterization of ahigh school principle as incompetent racist can be none other than a discredit toreputation. The suggestion that the board engaged in a cover-up of incompetence andracism achieves the same.

DefencesResponsible Communication

[35]

The merit of this defence lies in the value inherent in timely publication of mattersinvolving serious allegations, important to the public that lug a sense of urgency. Thejournalist faced with these exigencies who has tried and failed to get the other side can beexcused for not getting and not reporting both sides of the story.

[36]

The two publications do not disclose to the reader that the core occurrences transpiredtwo and one-half years ago. The context conveyed is that of recency. The passage oftime significantly erodes legitimate public interest.

[37]

If however the defendant can establish the requisite legitimate public interestcontemplated by this defence, the focus shifts to whether the defendant’s statements wereresponsible.

[38]

The exigencies that drive this defence evaporated with the passage of time.

confined to publications on government and political matters, nor is it necessary that theplaintiff be a “public figure”. Paras 101, 105, 106.

[39]

Here, the plaintiffs communicated its side of the story to the defendant in early 2014.
The defendant did not have to investigate; it was handed to him. Notwithstanding, thedefendant steadfastly neglected to report that side of the story.

[40]

The cogency of the publication depended on withholding the other side’s narrative fromthe audience and embellishing the time lapse context from at most ten school days to thecontext used, namely a month.

Fair Comment

[41]

A fair comment is an objectively honest expression of opinion with respect to facts whichare true and known to the persons to whom the comment is made – i.e. set out in thearticle.

[42]

The reading public could not know the facts or assess the facts and opinion withoutdisclosure of both sides of the story.

Justification (truth)

[43]

The truth of the content of any publication protects the author who holds to the truth.

[44]

In this case, there are two salient issues of fact.

[45]

The first is overstatement. The defence evidence oninterval of fifteen days from notification to removalthat interval, there were ten days of school. Theinterval to nearly a month – paras. 1 & 8 March 20
paras 4 & 29 March 27.

[46]

The fact finders’ determination of the second factual issue will likely have a prominentplace in the trial outcome. The defence version is based on three observations at twoseven-day intervals followed by the defendant’s observation the ensuing or fifteenth day.
The plaintiffs do not take issue with the observations of the reporting witness. They dotake issue with his and the defendant’s surmise. The plaintiffs’ version is that over thefifteen-day interval and perhaps beyond, the offensive drawings were covered severaltimes in the context of persistent repeated reappearances immediately on discovery.

[47]

That is a contested fact. The evidence from the maintenance custodian(s) who performedthe paint-overs will be persuasively probative.

the motion, at its best, exposes anof the offensive drawings. Withindefendant aggrandized this putativeand about/approximately a month –

Conclusion

[48]

The plaintiffs’ motion has to be dismissed. Without the sworn deposition of themaintenance staff tasked to cover the offensive markings, I am left to speculate and am

8

9

[49]

That said, if the custodian confirms timely responsive instruction from the principal’soffice to cover the swastikas, as they appeared, thwarted by a persistent perpetrator, thesubstance that might ground Mr. Gilcig’s comment/reportage evaporates to the point ofdisappearance leaving him without defence to defamation and exposed to significantdamage award and costs.

[50]

The lacuna in the plaintiff’s evidentiary record that is the omission of the custodian’sunderstanding of instructions relative to this matter foils the plaintiffs’ motion for theinterlocutory injunction sought.

[51]

It is, however, a Pyrrhic victory for the defendant. In the circumstances, having regard tothe interests at stake, the plaintiffs are not foreclosed from returning the motion with amore fulsome record.

Costs

[52]

If the parties are unable to agree on costs, they are to deliver written submissions withinfifteen days.

The Honourable Mr. Justice Rick Leroy

unable to confidently conclude a jury verdict in favour of the defendant at trial would beperverse.

Released: May 12, 2017

10

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
Upper Canada District School Board and Patricia BrownPlaintiffs
– and –
James Gilcig o/a Seaway MediaDefendant

REASONS ON INTERIM INJUNCTION MOTION

The Honourable Mr. Justice Rick Leroy

CITATION: Upper Canada District School Board v. Gilcig, 2017 ONSC 2904
COURT FILE NO.: CV 17-29
DATE: 2017/05/12

2

Released: May 12, 2017

