CITATION: URIU v. RIVADENEYRA, 2017 ONSC 3180
COURT FILE NO.: FC-14-2854-1
DATE: 2017/05/23

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:

KIMOKO URIU
Applicant )
– and –
FRANCISCO RIVADENEYRA
Respondent )

Michael Rappaport, for the Applicant

Any Mayer, for the Respondent

HEARD: By Written Submissions

SUPPLEM EN TAR Y DECISION REGARDING COSTS OF
HAGUE CONVENTION APPLICATI ON

L. SHEARD, J.

[1]
On March 27, 2017, I released my costs decision on the Hague Application brought bythe respondent, Francisco Rivadeneyra (“Father”). The Hague Application was heard by JusticePhillips who granted the Father’s application, with costs, but without fixing the amount of costs.

[2]
On September 14, 2016 the matter came before me when the applicant, Kimoku Uriu
(“Mother”) moved to suspend the Order of Justice Phillips and sought an award of costs. On thatdate, I dismissed the Mother’s motion on the basis that I had no jurisdiction to stay or vary theOrder of Justice Phillips. I also determined that the quantum of the costs awarded to the Fatherby Justice Phillips would be determined by the trial judge on the Mother’s application. I did notthen know that I would be the trial judge.

ONTARIO

[4]
By letter dated May 9, 2017, counsel for the Father asked for clarification with respect tothe timing of the payment of the costs awarded against the Mother on the Hague Application. Atmy invitation, counsel for the Mother provided submissions as when the costs awarded againstthe Mother would be payable to the Father.

[5]
I understand from the May 9, 2017 letter from Father’s counsel, that Mother took theposition that she was not required to pay the Father’s costs of the Hague Application until I hadrendered the trial decision and determined costs. In that way, if the Mother was successful attrial, she would be in a position to set off the costs she was ordered to pay the Father againstany costs awarded to her

[6]
By letter dated May 18, 2017 counsel for Mother provided his submissions regardingwhen the costs awarded on the Hague Application should be payable. In those submissions, it isasserted that costs are determined by Rule 24 of the Family Law Rules, (O. Reg 114/99) whichdo not include a presumption that costs are payable within 30 days. Furthermore, as per the 1998
decision Ontario Court of Appeal decision in Wine v. Fisher, 42 O.R. (3d) 153, costs of aninterlocutory order are payable only at the end of the litigation.

[7]Fisher.

[8]

Rule 1 (7) of the Family Law Rules provides:
If these rules do not cover a matter adequately, the court may givedirections, and the practice shall be decided by analogy to theserules, by reference to Courts of Justice Act and the Act governingthe case and, if the court considers it appropriate, by reference tothe Rules of Civil Procedure.

[9]
I accept the submissions of counsel for Mother that Rule 24 of the Family Law Rules donot speak to when costs awarded on an interlocutory matter are to be paid. For that reason it isappropriate to refer to Rule 57.03 (1), which state:

[3]
As it turned out, I was the trial judge on the Mother’s application and was required todetermine the amount of the Father’s costs of the Hague Application. I received costssubmissions from counsel for the Father and the Mother and fixed the Father’s costs of theHague Application at $13,267.84 to be paid by the Mother.

57.03 (1) On the hearing of a contested motion, unless the court is satisfied that adifferent order would be more just, the court shall,
(a) fix the costs of the motion and order them to be paid within 30 days; or
(b) in an exceptional case, refer the costs of the motion for assessment under Rule58 and order them to be paid within 30 days after assessment.
(2) Where a party fails to pay the costs of a motion as required under subrule (1), thecourt may dismiss or stay the party’s proceeding, strike out the party’s defence or makesuch other order as is just.

[10] Neither party raised the issue of when the costs awarded against Mother would bepayable and it was never my expectation nor intention that the payment of the costs of the HagueApplication would await the outcome of the trial decision. That the Mother would pay thosecosts regardless of the outcome of the trial was made clear in my costs decision. For example atparagraphs 15 and 16:

[15]
Whatever the outcome of the trial, the Father was entirely successful at each stageof his Hague Application.

[16] At the conclusion of the first week of trial, and when it was clear that the trial couldnot be resumed until 2017, the parties consented to an Order regarding Luca’s custodyand access, which was different from the Phillips Order. However, that consent Orderdoes not take away from the Father’s entitlement to costs related to the Orders that hesought and was granted in a Hague Application and made prior to the commencement oftrial.

[11]
I did not intend to defer the payment of costs or to provide that the costs awarded toFather on the Hague Application be set-off against any costs that Mother might be awardedfollowing the trial decision.

[12] Should there be any ambiguity or lack of clarity on the point, the costs awarded byJustice Phillips and fixed by me were intended to be and were payable by the Mother, within 30
days of March 27, 2017. As payment is now overdue, interest will be payable in accordancewith the Courts of Justice Act (R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, as am.)(2 % per annum).

Contested Motion

[13] Should either party seek his or her costs of the submissions related to this supplementarydecision, those costs, if any, may be included with the party’s trial costs, to be determinedfollowing the release of the trial decision.

L. Sheard J.
Released: May 23, 2017

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
KIMOKO URIU
Applicant
– and –
FRANCISCO RIVADENEYRA
Respondent

SUPPLEMENTARY DECISION REGARDING
COSTS OF HAGUE CONVENTION
APPLICATION

Sheard J.
Released: May 23, 2017

CITATION: URIU v. RIVADENEYRA, 2017 ONSC 3180
COURT FILE NO.: FC-2854-1
DATE: 2017/05/23

