ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
IN BANKRUPTCY and INSOLVENCY
IN THE MATTER OF THE BANKRUPTCY OF
THOMAS VERNER
OF THE CITY OF OTTAWA
IN THE PROVINCE OF ONTARIO

BEFORE:

Mr. Justice Stanley J. Kershman

HEARD IN OTTAWA:
APPEARANCE:

March 22, 2017 and May 24, 2017

Thomas Verner, the Bankrupt, represented by Eric LayTammy Dupuis, Opposing CreditorSylvie Lyons, on behalf of the Trustee Ginsberg Gingras

REASONS FOR DECISION CONCERNING OPPOSITION TO DISCHARGE
INTRODUCTION

[1]
This discharge is opposed by the Trustee in Bankruptcy and by an unsecured Creditor,Tammy Dupuis.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND

[2]
Mr. Verner is 48 years of age. He is a member of the Canadian Armed Forces and iscurrently posted on a peacekeeping mission.

[3]
Mr. Verner married Tammy Dupuis on April 5, 2012. The parties separated onSeptember 2013 after being married for 179 days. On October 6, 2014, Justice LevensonPolowin granted a final order which among other things, ordered that Mr. Verner payMs. Dupuis the sum of $33,881.97 by November 6, 2014, which represented a joint obligation toScotiabank on a loan, which Ms. Dupuis took responsibility to pay.

CITATION: Verner (Re), 2017 ONSC 3406
COURT FILE NO.: BK-15-01956720-0033
DATE: 2017/06/01

[4]
Mr. Verner filed a proposal on November 3, 2014 through Ginsberg Gingras about 25
days after the judgment was granted in favour of Ms. Dupuis. That proposal was defeated.
Mr. Verner subsequently went bankrupt on February 3, 2015.
Tammy Dupuis, the Opposing Creditor was appointed as an inspector in the Estate.

OPPOSITIONS TO DISCHARGE
Opposition to Discharge by the Trustee

[6]

This discharge is opposed by the Trustee on the following grounds:
(a)

that the Bankrupt failed to disclose that he obtained a posting loan of $25,000
during the bankruptcy;

(b)

that the Bankrupt failed to disclose the Trustee of his charge of marital status asof July 2016;

[7]
The Trustee also advised the Court that the Bankrupt had not complied with his surplusincome obligations which were still owing to the Trustee.
Opposition to Discharge by Tammy Dupuis

[8]
The Opposing Creditor opposed the Bankrupt’s discharge based on the fact that hecontinued to borrow monies after he filed for bankruptcy, i.e.: the posting loan, and, secondly,that he caused or contributed to his bankruptcy through reckless speculation, extravagantlifestyle, gambling or negligence with respect to his financial affairs.
ISSUES
1) Should the Posting Loan Monies be of Concern in this Bankruptcy?
Trustee’s Position:

[9]
The Trustee argues that a posting loan received by Mr. Verner was a loan that wasreceived after bankruptcy and that his bankruptcy should have been declared to the lender whichwas a branch of the Government of Canada.

[10] The Trustee was also concerned with the fact that a substantial portion of the proceeds ofthe posting loan were provided to Mrs. Verner, who was romantically involved with theBankrupt at the time of the loan.
Bankrupt’s Position:

[11] The Bankrupt argues that the lender was advised of the bankruptcy at the time that heapplied for the loan. He indicated that he had to repay the loan and that he was in the process ofdoing so over the next several years.

[5]

Opposing Creditor’s Position:

Analysis:

[13] The posting loan is a post-bankruptcy debt which is being repaid over a period of fouryears. The Court finds that monthly payments are being deducted from the Bankrupt’s salary topay for this loan and therefore is being repaid.

[14] The Bankrupt’s evidence is that he advised the lender of his bankruptcy at the time heobtained the loan. The Opposing Creditor argues that he did not disclose the loans that wereincluded in the bankruptcy in order to obtain the posting loan.

[15] As to the Trustee’s concern that proceeds of the loan were given to the Bankrupt’s nowcommon law spouse, the Court finds that since the loan is being repaid and since based on theevidence of Mr. Verner that he advised the lender that he was bankrupt, while the Courtappreciates that this was an issue that the Trustee had to bring to the attention of the Court, underthe circumstances of this case, the Court does not find that there is any issue in relation to theposting loan.

[16] As to whether the debts included in his bankruptcy were disclosed to the lender, the Courtfinds that is not a relevant factor because the debts included in his bankruptcy were no longerpayable at the time he applied for the posting loan, which was post-bankruptcy.
SURPLUS INCOME BASED ON TAX-FREE INCOME

[17] When deployed overseas, the Bankrupt receives his salary tax-free. That means that hissalary is higher than if deductions were being taken, which, in turn, means that surplus incomewill be higher. Mr. Verner owed an amount of surplus income prior to his discharge hearing.
The Trustee calculated that the Bankrupt’s surplus income was in the range of $14,000 - $16,600
from June 2016 until January 2017.

[18] The discharge hearing was not heard until March 2017 because the Bankrupt was still ondeployment. The Trustee has recalculated the Bankrupt’s surplus income based on the paymentsmade and the tax free status of the bankrupt’s salary. The Trustee has calculated that the totalsurplus income is $35,311.93, less already $12,487.71 paid, leaving a balance of $22,824.22
outstanding. The Trustee seeks an order that the bankrupt repay the full amount.

[19] The Bankrupt argues that he should only have to repay $15,000 of this amount because ofthe length of the bankruptcy and the fact that he had done nothing wrong.

[20] The Court finds that the surplus income of $22,824.22 is required to be paid by theBankrupt to the Estate for the benefit of the creditors on account of surplus income. The Courtdoes not see any reason why the amount should be reduced as requested by the Bankrupt.

[12] The Opposing Creditor argued that the Bankrupt did not advise the lender of all of hisdebts because he did not mention the debts which were included in his bankruptcy.

Opposition to Discharge by Tammy DupuisOpposing Creditor’s Position:
The opposing creditor opposes the Bankrupt’s discharge based on the following:

1. that the parties were only married for a very short period of time and that by an orderdated October 6, 2014 by the late Justice Levenson-Polowin, the Bankrupt was ordered torepay the Opposing Creditor the sum of $33,881.97;2. that Mr. Verner continued to borrow monies after he filed for bankruptcy, i.e.: the postingloan; and,3. that he caused or contributed to his bankruptcy through reckless speculation, extravagantlifestyle, gambling or negligence with respect to his financial affairs.
Bankrupt’s Position:

[22] The Bankrupt argues that this debt is included in the bankruptcy and that no amount ofmonies should be paid other than the surplus income.
Analysis:

[23] The total of the unsecured claims is $81,031.00. The total of the proven unsecuredclaims is $76,370.82.
The opposing creditor’s claim is $37,665.95 which representsapproximately 49% of the total proven unsecured claims.

[24] The Court accepts the evidence of the Bankrupt and the information contained on theStatement of Affairs, and finds that he went bankrupt because of the debt owed to the opposingcreditor. The opposing creditor was jointly liable on the debt and paid that amount out to theBank of Nova Scotia and is now stepping into the shoes of the Bank of Nova Scotia to claim theamount from Mr. Verner.

[25] The Court finds that the Bankrupt’s conduct in filing for bankruptcy to extinguish thisdebt was inappropriate. He made no payments on the judgment in favour of the opposingcreditor. The Bankrupt filed for his proposal and subsequent bankruptcy shortly after thejudgment was granted under opposing creditor’s favour. The marriage was short only 179 days.

[26] The Court finds that there is no evidence that Mr. Verner continued to borrow or obtaincredit after he realized that he could not pay his debt filed in the bankruptcy because the postingloan was made after Mr. Verner filed for bankruptcy and not before.

[27]

Therefore, the Court finds that Mr. Verner did not continue to borrow after bankruptcy.

[28] Mr. Verner is paying approximately $1,200 for the rental of one-half of the masterbedroom, which he occupies with Ms. Verner with whom is romantically involved.

[21]

[30] The Court notes Mr. Verner borrowed the posting loan and the benefit of which in largepart went to Ms. Verner.

[31] The Court finds that under s. 173(1)(a) that the assets of the Bankrupt are not equal to
$0.50 on the dollar on the amount of the unsecured liabilities and that has arisen in circumstancesthat the Bankrupt is justly responsible for.

[32] Therefore, the Court orders the Bankrupt to pay an additional amount of $8,500 to theTrustee in Bankruptcy for the benefit of the Creditors in addition to the sum of $22,824.22 as acondition of obtaining his discharge. These funds are payable at the minimum rate of $500 permonth commencing August 1, 2017 and are payable over a period of four years.
Findings

[33]

In conclusion the Court makes the following findings:
1) under s. 173(1)(a) that the assets of the Bankrupt are not equal to a value of $0.50
on the dollar on the amount of the unsecured liabilities and that has arisen incircumstance that the Bankrupt is justly responsible for;2) under s. 173(1)(m) that he failed to comply with his surplus income obligation.

COSTS

[34]
The Opposing Creditor was successful on the discharge hearing and should be entitled tocosts. The Court fixes those costs at $500. This amount shall be paid by the Trustee inBankruptcy out of the Estate proceeds to the Opposing Creditor in priority to any claims in thebankruptcy.

[35]

Order accordingly.

Mr. Justice Stanley J. Kershman

[29] The Court has considered that he is paying $1,200 for a room in a house and he is noteven there as he is deployed overseas. The Court finds that, essentially, Mr. Verner is subsidizingMs. Verner’s lifestyle with this arrangement.

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
IN BANKRUPTCY and INSOLVENCY
IN THE MATTER OF THE BANKRUPTCY OF
THOMAS VERNER
OF THE CITY OF OTTAWA
IN THE PROVINCE OF ONTARIO
BEFORE:

Mr. Justice Stanley J. Kershman

HEARD IN OTTAWA:
24, 2017
APPEARANCE:

March 22, 2017 and May

Thomas Verner, Bankrupt,represented by Eric LayTammy Dupuis, OpposingCreditorSylvie Lyons, on behalf of theTrustee Ginsberg Gingras

REASONS FOR DECISION CONCERNING
OPPOSITION TO DISCHARGE

Kershman J.
Released: June 1, 2017

CITATION: Verner (Re), 2017 ONSC 3406
COURT FILE NO.: BK-15-01956720-0033
DATE: 2017/06/01

