CITATION: Wang et al. v. Canada (Attorney General) 2017 ONSC 2841
COURT FILE NO.: CV-16-564402
DATE: 20170515

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
ZHENHUA WANG and CHUNXIANG )
YAN
) Rocco Galati and Reem Zaia, for theApplicants ) Applicants
– and –
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN IN RIGHT
OF CANADA, THE MINISTER OF
PUBLIC SAFETY AND EMERGENCY
PREPAREDNESS, and the CANADA
) James Todd and Nicholas Dodokin, for theBORDER SERVICES AGENCY
) Respondents
Respondents )
BETWEEN:

HEARD: April 24, 2017

REASONS FOR DECISION
DIAMOND J.:
Overview

[1]
The applicants are husband and wife, and citizens of both the People’s Republic of Chinaand the Dominican Republic. On or about March 7, 2014, and while in Canada under extendedtemporary resident visas, the applicants were arrested by the Canada Border Services Agency
(“CBSA”) which had received information that the applicants allegedly had multiple fraudulentidentities and were fugitives from justice in China.

[2]
As the CBSA felt there were grounds to believe that the applicants misrepresentedthemselves in their original immigrations applications, pursuant to the Immigration and RefugeeProtection Act, S.C. 2001 c.27 and its underlying regulations (“IRPA”), the applicants wereinitially placed in immigration detention pending an admissibility hearing into misrepresentation.
Before the admissibility hearing could proceed, the applicants made refugee claims which led, byoperation of law, to the withdrawal of the admissibility hearing.

ONTARIO

[4]
After attempting to seek further modifications to their terms of release, the applicantscommenced this application seeking the issuance of a writ of habeas corpus releasing them fromtheir current house arrest, or, in the alternative, amending their terms of release.

[5]
The applicants’ request for a writ of habeas corpus is opposed by the Attorney Generalof Canada (“AG”). Within this application, the AG also brings a preliminary motion pursuant tosection 106 of the Courts of Justice Act seeking a stay of this application on the basis of lack ofjurisdiction.

[6]
Both the AG’s motion and the application were argued before me on April 24, 2017, andI took my decision under reserve.

[7]

These are my Reasons for Decision.

Background

[8]
The applicants are foreign nationals, and citizens of both China and the DominicanRepublic. On September 30, 2012, they entered Canada under temporary resident visas whichthey had obtained from the Canadian Embassy in the Dominican Republic. After obtaining a sixmonth extension to their resident visas, they left Canada in or around August 2013.

[9]
On March 29, 2014, the applicants re-entered Canada after obtaining further temporaryresident visas from the Canadian Embassy in the Dominican Republic. Prior to their secondentry into Canada, the CBSA received information that the applicants allegedly possessedmultiple identities and were fugitives allegedly involved in a multi-level marketing pyramidscheme which defrauded approximately 60,000 people of approximately $180,000,000.00
(CAD).
The Arrest

[10] Pursuant to section 55 of the IRPA, the applicants were arrested by the CBSA on March7, 2014, and placed in custody. By late May 2014, the CBSA referred the applicants to theImmigration Division for an admissibility hearing. The applicants remained in custody on thebasis that they were flight risks and unlikely to appear at their pending admissibility hearing.

[11] On June 23, 2014, and prior to the commencement of their admissibility hearing, theapplicants made formal refugee claims which, as previously stated, led by operation of law to thewithdrawal of the admissibility hearing.
Detention Reviews

[3]
The Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada’s (“IRB”) Immigration Division initiallyordered the continued detention of the applicants, but on November 16, 2015 the applicants wereordered released from custody under house arrest on specific terms and conditions, and they haveremained under house arrest to this date.

[13] However, the applicants sought judicial review of all three of the Immigration Division’sdecisions, and each decision was in turn quashed by the Federal Court. Each of the presidingFederal Court judges found aspects of each decision to be unreasonable sending the matter backfor a rehearing. The applicants provided the court with the following timeline setting out thechronological history of their detention reviews:
Event

Hearing Dates

ImmigrationJudicial Review Judicial ReviewDivision Decision Hearing Dates Decision DatesDate

DetentionReview #1

August. 1, 13, 27,29, September 3,19, 24, 29, 2014

December2014

DetentionReview #2

February 11, 2015 April 2, 2015

May 6, 2015

DetentionReview #3

June 19, 2015

September015

11, January2015

August 24, 2015

19, January 21, 2015

June 8, 2015
24, September2015

28,

The Federal Court Action

[14] There is no dispute between the parties that during the above time period the applicantsremained in custody. On October 16, 2015, the applicants issued a Statement of Claim in theFederal Court against several government officials involved in the applicants’ arrest andcontinued detention. In that Federal Court proceeding, the applicants sought damages and a writof habeas corpus.

[15] On September 16, 2016, the applicants’ Federal Court action was struck out in itsentirety. The applicants have appealed that decision to the Federal Court of Appeal and I
understand that the appeal is currently pending.
The Applicants are Released

[16] Shortly after the issuance of the applicants’ Federal Court action, a further detentionreview occurred. On November 16, 2015 the Immigration Division ordered the applicantsreleased from detention subject to various terms and conditions. The AG submits that those

[12] The applicants’ first detention review occurred on July 23, 2014. Over the next 14
months, the applicants were the subject of three unsuccessful detention reviews by theImmigration Division which found on each occasion that the applicants were unlikely to appearand had both the willingness and financial means to elude detection in Canada.

●

the posting of a $20,000.00 performance bond,

●

that the applicants reside at all times and be present 24 hours, 7 days a week at 85
Hollingham Road, Markham, Ontario (“the Hollingham property”) save formedical emergencies or as otherwise provided for in the order for release,

●

that the applicants fully co-operate with the CBSA in obtaining travel documents,and

●

that the applicants not engage in any education or employment withoutgovernment authorization.

[17] To ensure compliance with their terms of release, there is electronic surveillance and twoguards at the Hollingham property at all times. To the extent that the applicants may leave theHollingham property (i.e., to attend church once a week), the guards must accompany theapplicants. The applicants complain that the associated costs of the surveillance and securityguards are exorbitant and lay at their feet on a monthly basis.
Requests for Modified Terms of Release

[18] The applicants were released from custody on December 2, 2015. Thereafter, theapplicants made three separate applications to the Immigration Division to obtain modificationsto the terms and conditions ordered as part of their release. Those applications were granted bythe Immigration Division in orders dated April 1, 2016, April 29, 2016 and October 7, 2016.

[19] The applicants thereafter filed a fourth application to the Immigration Division seekingmore significant modifications to the terms and conditions of their release. That fourthapplication was dismissed on February 28, 2017. Based upon the record before me, it does notappear that the applicants sought judicial review of that decision by the Federal Court.

[20]

The applicants commenced the within application on November 18, 2016.

The Refugee Claims

[21] It is important to consider the status of the applicants’ refugee hearing, whichcommenced on January 13, 2015. The record discloses that the Minister of Citizenship andImmigration (“Minister”) intervened and took the position that the applicants were ineligible tomake refugee claims due to alleged serious criminality abroad.

terms and conditions were proposed by the applicants themselves. In any event, the applicantsdid not seek judicial review of the terms of their release, which included:

[22] In early July 2015, the Minister was ordered to disclose various materials to theapplicants, but relying upon section 37 of the Canada Evidence Act, R.S.C 1984 c. C5, theMinister claimed public interest privilege and refused to disclose certain material to theapplicants. As a result, the refugee hearing was held in abeyance pending the determination ofthe Minister’s privilege claims.

[23] On May 4, 2016, the Federal Court released a decision finding that certain documentsover which the Minister claimed privileged were relevant, and ordered redacted versions ofdocuments to be disclosed. That decision did not find that the Minister’s decision constituted anabuse of process.

[24] On December 29, 2016, the IRB’s Refugee Protection Division issued a further decisionfinding that the Minister’s conduct in failure to disclose relevant documentation to the applicantsduring the refugee hearing “breached the duties of candor and disclosure and amounted to anabuse of process”.

[25] As a result, the Refugee Protection Division ordered the applicants’ refugee hearing toproceed on a de novo basis before a different panel, with the applicants’ testimony to dateobtained in the first hearing to be struck out.
The Test for Habeas Corpus

[26] As held by the Supreme Court of Canada in Mission Institution v. Khela 2014 SCC 24(a)

the applicant must establish that he/she has been deprived of liberty;

(b)

once a deprivation of liberty is proven, the applicant must raise a legitimateground upon which to question the deprivation’s legality; and,

(c)

if the applicant raises such a ground, the onus then shifts to the respondentauthorities to show that the deprivation of liberty was lawful.

[27] On its preliminary motion for a stay, the AG submits that this Court should decline toexercise its habeas corpus jurisdiction because the applicants cannot satisfy the first criteria ofthe test for habeas corpus; namely, that they have been deprived of their liberty. Specifically,the AG submits that what the applicants are seeking is no more than a lower form of restriction,and not a return to a level of restriction which they previously possessed.

[28] While it is arguable that the AG’s preliminary motion for a stay is superfluous (in that itsposition on the motion, if accepted, would result in a dismissal of the application in any event),in my view the merits of the AG’s position stand or fall on the issue of whether the applicants’
current house arrest amounts to a detention or deprivation of their liberty.

[30] I thus embark upon a review of the relevant jurisprudence, both in the immigration andcriminal/extradition contexts, focusing upon the concept of detention and whether the applicantscan satisfy the first criteria of the habeas corpus test.

The Chaudhary Jurisprudence
(a)

where a statute confers jurisdiction on an appellate court to correct the errors of alower court and release the applicant if need be, or

(b)

where the legislature has put in place a complete, comprehensive and expertprocedure for review of an administrative decision.

[32] The applicants place great reliance upon the Court of Appeal for Ontario’s decision inChaudhary v. Canada (Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness) 2015 ONCAmonths. Justice Coats found that Ogiamien established that his detention was not only lengthy,but was of uncertain duration. As a result, Ogiamien’s habeas corpus application was granted.

[34] I note that, as in Chaudhary itself, Ogiamien was detained at correctional facilities andcomplexes throughout the entire 25 month period. In coming to her decision, Justice Coatsspecifically stated as follows (my emphasis in bold):
“In coming to this conclusion that Mr. Ogiamien’s detention was verylengthy, I have considered that throughout his detention he has been held

[29] In Khela, the Supreme Court of Canada noted that both the Federal Court and theprovincial Superior Courts are “tasked with reviewing decisions made within the federal prisonwalls”. As such, before I can assess whether the applicants’ detention was unlawful, I must firstfind that they have been and continue to be detained within the walls of their residence.

in a maximum security part of a corrections facility (the remandarea). This has for the most part been at Maplehurst and for a short periodat Central North Corrections Centre. The length of detention must beconsidered in this context. He has been held on immigration detentionin a maximum security part of a facility for 25 months.”

[36] Once again, as in both Chaudhary and Ogiamien, Ali was held in custody at variousdetention centres and correctional centres during the entire seven year period. As such, thesethree decisions were all concerned with habeas corpus applications made by applicants whowere detained in custody.
House Arrest

[37] Surprisingly, there is limited jurisprudence dealing with the issue of whether house arrestconstitutes detention for the purpose of a habeas corpus application.

[39] The court dismissed Saxena’s application on the grounds that his detention or deprivationof liberty was open to consideration by the Court of Appeal in two already existing proceedings,and Saxena therefore had an adequate and effective alternative remedy through the appeal andjudicial review processes under the Extradition Act S.C. 1999 c.18. Notably, the court ended itsanalysis with the following:
“It is therefore unnecessary to consider the alternative bases put forward bythe Attorney General for declining to hear the habeas corpus application. Inparticular, I make no comment as to the interesting issue of whether habeascorpus is available to a person such as Mr. Saxena, who is not ingovernment custody as such, but is subject to court-ordered house arrestmonitored by private security officers while also subject to committal andsurrender orders for extradition.”

“The respondents do not concede that habeas corpus is available tosomeone like the applicant who has been granted judicial interim release inthe form of house arrest. I do not have to decide that issue.”
Are the Applicants Detained?
“Habeas corpus is available to challenge an unlawful deprivation of liberty. Inthe context of correctional law, there are three different deprivations of liberty:
the initial deprivation of liberty, a substantial change in conditions amountingto a further deprivation of liberty, and a continuation of the deprivation ofliberty.”

[43] The AG argues that since the applicants were released from custody, their terms ofrelease have become progressively less restrictive right up until the Immigration Division’sFebruary 28, 2017 decision dismissing the applicants’ most recent request for modifications oftheir terms of release. As such, the AG submits that there has been no further deprivation ofliberty.

[44] The applicants argue that ever since their arrest, their physical liberty has been “in oneform (jail) or another (complete house arrest), deprived.” The applicants rely upon the stringentnature of the terms of their release in support of their position that they have been deprived oftheir residual liberty.
In Ethier, the applicant was arrested and subsequently released from custody on terms andconditions which included house arrest with supervision and control by a surety. The applicantargued that his house arrest constituted detention, and brought a habeas corpus applicationseeking to be released or freed from that condition of recognizance as it allegedly constituteddetention and a deprivation of his constitutional liberty.

comprehensive statutory regime (i.e. the same reasoning as in the 2004 decision). In paragraph 2
of that decision, the court stated:

“This condition of house arrest issued under s. 515(2) does not constitutedetention of Brother Ethier. The applicant is not in jail. The above conditionof bail, although restricting his liberty, was a condition of his release fromjail. The wording of s. 515 and S. 519 of the Code distinguish between anaccused being detained in custody and being released from detention. Therelevant portions of these sections are:
515(1) ……… where an accused who is charged with an offenceother than an offence listed in section 469 is taken before a justice,the justice shall … order, in respect of that offence, that the accusedbe released on his giving an undertaking without conditions unlessthe prosecutor, having been given a reasonable opportunity to doso, shows cause, in respect of that offence, why the detention ofthe accused in custody is justified.

515(2) Where the justice does not make an order under subsection
(1), he shall, unless the prosecutor shows cause whythe detention of the accused is justified, order that the accusedbe released
(a) on his giving an undertaking with such conditions as the justicedirects;515 (6) Detention in custody - Where the prosecutor shows causewhy the detention of the accused in custody is justified, the justiceshall order that the accused be detained in custody until he is dealtwith according to law and …….
519(1) Release of accused - Where a justice makes an order under515(1), (2), (7) or (8),
(a) if the accused thereupon complies with an order, thejustice shall direct that the accused be released
(i)

forthwith, if the accused is not required tobe detained in custody in respect to any othermatter, or

[46] In dismissing the habeas corpus application, Justice Kane held as follows (his emphasisin bold):

Notwithstanding the limitations to his liberty under this condition of bail,the applicant is not presently detained under s.515 of the Criminal Code.
Parliament is presumed to have intended a distinction in the use of theterms detention, detained in custody and release from custody. Until hisrelease from custody on conditions including house arrest, BrotherEthier was, but is no longer detained. The historical use of a Writ of HabeasCorpus directing a jailer to deliver up the person in custody is not applicableto the applicant following his release from detention.”

[47] Justice Kane made his decision in the context of a criminal proceeding. As such, theapplicants no doubt rely upon Chaudhary with a view to convincing this Court to come to adifferent conclusion as this application is brought in an immigration context.

[48] In my view, the Court of Appeal in Chaudhary implicitly held that for habeas corpuspurposes – even in an immigration context – detention means jail or imprisonment. Atparagraphs 38-40 of Chaudhary, the Court of Appeal held:

“The prerogative writ of habeas corpus is “a cornerstone of liberty” and “ameans of judicial control over the arbitrary behaviour of the executivegovernment”. It is “one of the most important safeguards of the liberty ofthe subject”: M. Groves, “Habeas corpus, Justiciability and ForeignAffairs” (2013) 11:3 N.Z. J. Pub. & Int’l L. 587, at p. 588. It is also “themost significant means of protecting individual liberty”: R.J. Sharpe, J.
Farbey & S. Atrill, The Law of Habeas Corpus, 3rd ed. (New York: OxfordUniversity Press, 2011), at p. 1. The writ is thus often referred to as the
“Great Writ of Liberty”: see May v. Ferndale Institution,2005 SCC(SCC), [1988] 2 S.C.R. 595, at p. 645. It has also been described as “thegreat and efficacious writ, in all manner of illegal confinement”: D. Parkes,
“The ‘Great Writ’ Reinvigorated? Habeas corpus in Contemporary Canada”
(2012) 36 Man. L.J. 351, at p. 352.
Most significantly in Canada, it is guaranteed by s. 10(c) ofthe Charter, which reads as follows: “Everyone has the right on arrest ordetention … to have the validity of the detention determined by wayof habeas corpus and to be released if the detention is not lawful.” Asexplained by the Supreme Court of Canada in May, at para. 22:

(ii) as soon thereafter as the accused is no longerrequired to be detained in custody in respect ofany other matter…..

Habeas corpus is a crucial remedy in the pursuit of twofundamental rights protected by the Canadian Charter of Rightsand Freedoms: (1) the right to liberty of the person and the rightnot to be deprived thereof except in accordance with theprinciples of fundamental justice (s. 7 of the Charter); and (2)
the right not to be arbitrarily detained or imprisoned (s. 9 ofthe Charter).
Sharpe at p. 21 described the traditional form of review available on habeascorpus as follows:
The writ is directed to the gaoler or person having custody orcontrol of the applicant. It requires that person to return to thecourt, on the day specified, the body of the applicant and thecause of his detention. The process focuses upon the causereturned. If the return discloses a lawful cause, the prisoner isremanded; if the cause returned is insufficient or unlawful, theprisoner is released. The matter directly at issue is simply theexcuse or reason given by the party who is exercising restraintover the applicant.”

[49] In any event, a review of the provisions in Division 6 of the IRPA discloses that thewords chosen by Parliament seem to distinguish between a foreign national being detained incustody and being released from detention

[50] Section 55 of the IRPA permits the arrest and detention of a permanent resident orforeign national with or without a warrant on specific grounds.

[51]

Section 56(1) of the IRPA provides as follows:
“An officer may order the release from detention of a permanent resident ora foreign national before the first detention review by the ImmigrationDivision if the officer is of the opinion that the reasons for the detention nolonger exist. The officer may impose any conditions, including the paymentof a deposit or the posting of a guarantee for compliance with theconditions, that the officer considers necessary.”

[52] Pursuant to section 58(1) of the IRPA, the Immigration Division shall order the release ofa permanent resident or a foreign national unless it is satisfied that inter alia, he/she is a dangerto the public or unlikely to appear for an admissibility hearing. If the Immigration Division issatisfied of the existence of such factors, then it shall order the continued detention of thepermanent resident or foreign national.

[54] Upon request by an applicant, the Immigration Division may order the applicant’s releaseon any terms or conditions that the Immigration Division considers necessary, which wouldinclude house arrest. When the applicants in the case before me were released from custody onterms and conditions that included house arrest, they were no longer detained for the purpose ofa writ of habeas corpus.
“My observation about the wording of this provision is that Parliament hascreated a clear dichotomy between, on the one hand, pre-trial release and, onthe other hand, pre-trial detention in custody. Put bluntly, bail is notjail. The wording of s. 515 makes it clear that bail is what an accusedperson seeks in order to stay out of jail.
In saying this, I do not suggest that bail is not a restraint on the liberty of anaccused person. It is a restraint and, where there are strict bail conditions, itcan be a serious restraint. However, statutory words must be given theirnatural meaning, and the natural meaning of “release”, “detention” and
“custody” suggests that there is a fundamental difference between bail andjail. The natural meaning of these words  known at a practical, commonsense level by all accused persons who seek bail  is that the pith andsubstance of bail is liberty, whereas the essence of jail is a profound loss ofliberty.”

[56] The applicants have already successfully obtained variations and modifications to theirterms of release from the Immigration Division, and it is still open to them to seek a furthervariance or modification of those terms before the Immigration Division, and, if necessary,before the Federal Court by way of an application for judicial review.

[57]
Costs

Accordingly, for these reasons the application is dismissed.

[53] Pursuant to section 58.1(1) of the IRPA, if a foreign national is released, the Ministermay impose any conditions, including the payment of a deposit or the posting of a guarantee forcompliance with the conditions that he or she considers necessary.

[59] The AG may serve and file its costs submissions within 10 business days of the release ofthese Reasons. Those submissions shall be no more than five pages including a Bill of Costs.

[60] The applicants shall thereafter have an additional 10 business days from the receipt of therespondents’ costs submissions to deliver their responding costs submissions which shall also beno more than five pages including a Bill of Costs.

Diamond J.
Released: May 15, 2017

[58] I would urge the parties to try and resolve the issues of costs of this application. In theabsence of such an agreement, the parties may deliver written costs submissions for my reviewand consideration.

CITATION: Wang et al. v. Canada (Attorney General) 2017 ONSC 2841
COURT FILE NO.: CV-16-564402
DATE: 20170515

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
ZHENHUA WANG and CHUNXIANG YAN
Applicants
– and –
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN IN RIGHT OF
CANADA, THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SAFETY
AND EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS, and theCANADA BORDER SERVICES AGENCY
Respondents

REASONS FOR DECISION
Diamond J.

Released: May 15, 2017

ONTARIO

