CITATION: Western Steel and Tube Ltd. v. Technoflange Inc., 2017 ONSC 3332
COURT FILE NO.: CV-10-8839-00CL
DATE: 20170530

B E T W E E N:
Western Steel and Tube Ltd., Plaintiff
– and –
Technoflange Inc. and Canadian Tire Corporation,Limited and Jiangsu Sainty Sumex Tools Corp. Ltd.
also known as Jiangsu Sainty International Group alsoknown as JMET Corporation carrying on business inNorth America as Sainty International LLC, DefendantsBEFORE:

F.L. Myers J.

COUNSEL: David A. Seed counsel for the PlaintiffPeter J. Henein, Shane Hardy, and Stefanie A. Holland, counsel for the defendantCanadian Tire Corporation, LimitedA.J. Esterbauer and Dale E. Schlosser, counsel for the defendant Jiangsu SaintySumex Tools Corp. Ltd.
HEARD:

May 29, 2017
ENDORSEMENT

[1] By reasons dated May 2, 2017, reported at 2017 ONSC 2697, the court set aside the defaultjudgment obtained by the plaintiff without notice to the defendants. In addition, the court setaside the noting in default of the defendant Sainty Sumex Tools Corp. Ltd. The lifting of thenoting in default however is conditional upon Sainty Sumex fulfilling terms designed to ensurethat despite its prior avoidance of the litigation, it now participates fully, efficiently, and with norisk that Sainty Sumex will prejudice the plaintiff should it retreat behind foreign borders.

[2] The plaintiff seeks costs of the motion in light of the default of Sainty Sumex which theplaintiff argues is the ultimate cause of the need for a motion. It submits that the court can makea Sanderson order to have Sainty Sumex pay directly any costs that might otherwise be payableby the plaintiff to the co-defendant Canadian Tire.

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

[3] I agree with the plaintiff that Sainty Sumex defaulted and has engaged in a game of cat andmouse. I would not award it with costs as I view its conduct to have been deliberately inefficientand tactical. It played games to avoid being served and then to avoid participating in thelitigation on the merits once it was served. However, as noted in my prior reasons, theconditions imposed on Sainty Sumex will ameliorate any prejudice caused by Sainty Sumex todate. While Sainty Sumex succeeded in having the default judgment set aside, the outcome wasdecidedly mixed from its perspective in light of the conditions imposed on the lifting of thenoting in default.

[4]

I order no costs in favour of or against Sainty Sumex.

[5] That is where my agreement with the plaintiff’s submissions ends. The motion was notcaused just by Sainty Sumex’s default. Had the plaintiff limited the relief it sought at the defaulttrial to in personam relief against Sainty Sumex; had it made full and fair disclosure of allmaterial facts to Penny J.; and had it provided notice of the trial to counsel for Sainty Sumex andCanadian Tire, then it might be able to blame the need for a motion and the outcome on thedefault of Sainty Sumex.

[6] In my view, the plaintiff bears full responsibility for the need for Canadian Tire to havemoved and Canadian Tire was fully successful in its motion.

[7] Moreover, Mr. Seed continues to play word games. Twice in his costs submissions, heargues that the defendants had warnings of all steps. The findings that I made did not involveamorphous warnings. Rather, I found expressly that the plaintiff failed to give notice of thedefault trial to the defendants as it was required to do. Mr. Seed denies violating the Advocate’sSociety’s Principles of Civility despite my express holding to the contrary. It is ironic that in thecosts submissions Mr. Seed seems to rely upon unsworn evidence that he gave some form of oralwarning to the defendants during a proposed mediation session before Prothonotary Aalto of theFederal Court. At the hearing of the motion, Mr. Seed objected to the use by the defendants ofany information that was conveyed at that mediation session and the court upheld the objection.

[8] It is the plaintiffs’ failure to schedule and move for judgment appropriately and then itsown inappropriate behaviour at the trial that led to the motion by Canadian Tire regardless ofwhatever complaints the plaintiff had against Sainty Sumex.

[9]
Moreover, having obtained relief that plainly bound Canadian Tire inappropriately, theplaintiff declined to consent to settlement offers made by Canadian Tire whereby it would agreeto refrain from challenging the default judgment against Sainty Sumex provided that the plaintiffsimply removed from the judgment the declarations that purported to bind Canadian Tire. Theplaintiff’s response was to try to leverage its wrongfully obtained judgment against CanadianTire to pressure it to help have Sainty Sumex pay the plaintiff the damages awarded by Penny J.
In its material for the motion before me, the plaintiff realized that it could not hold its judgmentbinding Canadian Tire. It made a half-hearted admission to that effect. But at the hearing of themotion, Mr. Seed volunteered a full throated undertaking on behalf of the plaintiff to refrain

-2-

from enforcing the default judgment against Canadian Tire. If it knew that the judgment couldnot be maintained against Canadian Tire, the plaintiff should have consented to set it aside. Bytrying to extract terms, it relied inappropriately on an ill-gotten judgment to try to better itsposition.

[10] I readily understand cases where the court declines to reward a defendant with costs wherea default judgment is set aside. The order is often seen as an indulgence to a defaultingdefendant. This type of argument would apply to Sainty Sumex for example. But Canadian Tirewas not in default. There was no valid basis for the plaintiff to seek relief before Penny J. thatbound Canadian Tire. There was no valid basis for the plaintiff to move before Penny J. forrelief that affected Canadian Tire without notice to counsel for Canadian Tire. There was novalid basis for the plaintiff to fail to disclose to Penny J. the relevant facts outlined in myreasons.

[11] While Canadian Tire’s offers to settle were not in the form required for Rule 49 to apply asof right, I am entitled to consider them under the court’s broad discretion as to costs under Rule49.13 and s. 131 of the Courts of Justice Act.

[12] In my view the plaintiff ought to pay Canadian Tire its costs of the motion. Nothing doneby Sainty Sumex caused the issues on which Canadian Tire moved. It was the plaintiff’s ownmisconduct that led to Canadian Tire having a need to have its rights vindicated.

[13] The fixing of costs is a discretionary decision under section 131 of the Courts of JusticeAct. That discretion is generally to be exercised in accordance with the factors listed in Rule57.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure. These include the principle of indemnity for thesuccessful party (57.01(1)(0.a)), the expectations of the unsuccessful party (57.01(1)(0.b)), theamount claimed and recovered (57.01(1)(a)), and the complexity of the issues14579 (ON CA), (2004), 71 O.R. (3d) 291, at paras 26, 37.

[14] I have reviewed the Costs Outlines of the plaintiff and Canadian Tire. The total hoursincurred are quite similar with the exception of a junior who apparently spent 100 hourspreparing motion materials in addition to the 66 spent by senior counsel. I agree that anunsuccessful party cannot complain that the other party has used counsel who is more expensiveprovided that the rates charged are reasonable and proportional. Moreover, the use of juniors todo the work of seniors is often efficient. But I do not see how it would have been reasonablyanticipated by the plaintiff that Canadian Tire would incur costs in the order of $100,000 on thismotion. However, in this case, the plaintiff’s strategic approach has required two or three letterson each point instead of engaging in simple, clear communication. Mr. Seed’s nitpicking on themeaning of expressions like “ex parte default judgment” or his deliberate refusal to answersimple questions when asked by counsel have increased costs inefficiently and that falls on theplaintiff’s side of the ledger. So too does the failure to accept Canadian Tire’s reasonable offers

-3-

to accept an outcome that the plaintiff ultimately conceded at the hearing. All things considered,the plaintiff ought to have expected that Canadian Tire would bring all weapons to bear and thatthe motion would be fully fought with expensive consequences.
In all, consideringreasonableness overall, Canadian Tire’s success, its offers to settle, and the plaintiff’s failure tomake full disclosure to Penny J. in addition to its other misconduct delineated above, in my viewthe plaintiff ought to pay Canadian Tire forthwith its costs fixed in the amount of $75,000 allinclusive.

[15] The plaintiff argues that Canadian Tire may be indemnifying Sainty Sumex. If one or theother of the defendants is an indemnifier, as would not be unusual, then the misconduct of SaintySumex may well be part of a strategy between both defendants to whipsaw the plaintiff. While I
considered making Canadian Tire’s costs payable to it only if it wins the main litigation (in thecause) I ultimately reject that approach. There is no assurance that the trial judge willnecessarily inquire into or learn about the true economic relationship as between the defendants.
Were I to defer costs pending a subsequent judge satisfying herself that Canadian Tire is notcomplicit with Sainty Sumex, I may be creating new issues or creating an insoluble issue.
Moreover, even if it is true that Canadian Tire is the puppet master that has been pulling SaintySumex’s strings throughout, that still does not excuse the plaintiff from adopting theinappropriate approach that it took in obtaining the default judgment without notice, purportingto bind Canadian Tire to relief, and failing to disclose material facts to Penny J. The nondisclosure alone is an independent basis on which I am satisfied that it is fair and reasonable toexercise the discretion to award costs against the plaintiff in favour of Canadian Tire.

F.L. Myers, J.
Date: May 30, 2017

-4-

