CITATION: Wong v. Smith, 2017 ONSC 2721
COURT FILE NO.: CV-16-00547435
MOTION HEARD: 20170405

RE:

Norman Wong, PlaintiffAND:
Shane Smith and Nadine Smith, Defendants

BEFORE:

Master B. McAfee

COUNSEL: Charles Haworth for the PlaintiffShane Smith and Nadine Smith, Defendants, in PersonScott Rosen for the Proposed Defendants, Joseph Sereda and Sereda & SeredaJames Riewald for National Holdings Ltd. (present for part of motion only)
HEARD:

April 5, 2017
REASONS FOR DECISION

Nature of this Motion

[1]

This is a motion brought by the plaintiff for leave to amend the statement of claim andleave to issue a certificate of pending litigation (CPL) against two properties: 795
Spillsbury Drive, Peterborough (the Spillsbury property) and 31 Wispi Shore Road, R.R.
#5, Lindsay (the Wispi property) (collectively the properties).

Procedural History of this Motion

[2]

On February 26, 2016, the plaintiff sought to “walk in” an opposed motion, brought onshort notice, for leave to issue a CPL against the properties. The parties were directed tomy ex parte court. While waiting to be reached, counsel for the plaintiff and counsel forthe defendants agreed to an interim order that the defendants not sell, transfer orotherwise encumber the properties pending the hearing of the motion for a CPL or theagreement of the parties and/or further court order. The motion for a CPL was adjournedsine die on consent.

[3]

On March 2, 2016, the plaintiff sought to “walk in” another motion, brought on shortnotice, for leave to issue a CPL against the properties and the additional relief of leave toamend the statement of claim. The parties were directed to my regular motions court. The

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

[4]

The motion was subsequently adjourned a number of times as a result of health issues ofthen defendants’ counsel. The last adjournment was granted as a result of a new versionof the proposed amended statement of claim having been provided to the defendantsshortly before the February 28, 2017, return date.

[5]

At the return of the motion on April 5, 2017, the defendants were not represented bycounsel and the proposed defendants, Mr. Sereda and Sereda & Sereda were representedby Mr. Rosen. No further adjournments were sought by any party.

[6]

No factum or case law were filed by the defendants or proposed defendants. No crossexaminations took place.

[7]

Counsel for the first mortgagee on the Wispi property, National Holdings Ltd. attendedfor morning of April 5, 2017, only. It was agreed as between the plaintiff and NationalHoldings Ltd. that National Holdings Ltd. would not take a position on this motionwithout prejudice to the ability of National Holdings Ltd. to bring a motion to dischargethe CPL at a later date, if necessary. Based on that agreement between the plaintiff andNational Holdings Ltd., counsel for National Holdings Ltd. did not return to courtfollowing the lunch recess.

Motion for Leave to Amend the Statement of Claim

[8]

The proposed defendants do not oppose the motion for leave to amend the statement ofclaim.

[9]

The submissions of the current defendants focused on the merits of the proposedamendments and not any prejudice arising as a result of the amendments.

[10]

Rule 26.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure provides:
26.01 On motion at any stage of an action the court shall grant leave to amend apleading on such terms as are just, unless prejudice would result that could not becompensated for by costs or an adjournment.

[11]

Having regard to the material before me and the submissions of the parties, the proposeddefendants not opposing, I satisfied that no prejudice will result that could not becompensated for by costs or an adjournment.

[12]

Leave is accordingly granted to amend the statement of claim in the form attached to theletter from plaintiff’s counsel dated February 23, 2017.

reason for the urgency was that on February 26, 2016, a mortgage in the amount of
$750,000. was registered on the Wispi property in favour of defendants’ counsel. Thedefendants sought an adjournment of this motion in light of the short notice. I granted theadjournment on the term that leave be granted leave to issue a CPL on the properties onan interim basis.

[13]

Pursuant to Rule 42.01 and section 103 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.C.43,the plaintiff seeks an order granting leave to issue a CPL in respect of the properties.

[14]

In the statement of claim, including the amendments for which I have granted leave, theplaintiff alleges fraudulent conveyances with respect to the properties. In the alternative,the plaintiff alleges a resulting and/or constructing trust with respect to the Wispiproperty.

[15]

On a motion for leave to issue a CPL the court must exercise its discretion in equity andlook at all relevant matters between the parties.

[16]

As stated by Master Muir in United States (Securities & Exchange Commission) v.
Boock, 2010 ONSC 2340 (Ont. Master) at para 9:
The courts of this province have long held that an action to set aside a fraudulentconveyance is an action in which an interest in land is brought into question. SeeBank of Montreal v. Ewing (1982), 35 O.R. (2d) 225 (Ont. Div. Ct.) at paragraph1.

[17]

Master Muir went on to review the two lines of authority concerning the test to be appliedwhen determining whether leave ought to be granted to issue a CPL in an action to setaside a fraudulent conveyance:
…The first arises from the decisions of this court in Vettese v. Fleming, 1992
CarswellOnt 454 (Ont.Gen.Div.) and Nordic Insurance Co. of Canada v.
Harkness, [2001] O.J. No. 1123 (Ont.S.C.J.). Those cases articulate the test asrequiring the motion court to find, on the evidence before it, a prima facie case offraud and that a trial judge could conclude that the impugned transfer was madewith the intention to defeat the creditors and for no real consideration.
In Grefford v. Fielding, [2004] O.J. No. 1210 (Ont. S.C.J.) this court set out asomewhat different test, namely that the moving plaintiff must satisfy the courtthat its claim has a high probability of success; that the transfer was made with theintent to defeat or delay creditors (evidence that the transfer was for less than fairmarket value lightens this burden); and that the balance of convenience favoursthe issuing of a CPL in the circumstances. See Grefford at paragraph 26.

[18]

The plaintiff was an investor with Synergy Group (2000) Inc. (Synergy) in 2005 and2006. The defendant Shane Smith was one of the principals of Synergy. The plaintiffalleges that Synergy was marketing a tax scheme that was found to be a sham. Thedefendants deny that the plaintiff was defrauded and submit that the allegations of fraudhave not been proven and that the matter is currently before the Federal Court of Canada.

Leave to Issue a Certificate of Pending Litigation

On July 4, 2014, the plaintiff obtained default judgment against Shane Smith, Synergyand Jean Breau in the amount of $134,966.74 plus costs in the amount of $5,438.65.
Although the defendant Shane Smith takes issue with the judgment and submits that theplaintiff’s obtaining of the judgment was improper, the defendant has not taken steps toset aside the judgment.
The Spillsbury Property

[20]

The Spillsbury property was purchased by the defendants Shane Smith and NadineSmith, jointly on November 16, 2000. The defendants Shane Smith and Nadine Smith arespouses of one another. The Spillsbury property was held jointly until Shane Smithtransferred his interest to Nadine Smith on October 18, 2004. The consideration was $1.

[21]

In addition, also as stated by Master Muir in United States (Securities & ExchangeCommission), the existence of one or more “badges of fraud” may give rise to aninference of an intent to defraud, in the absence of an explanation by the defendants.

[22]

In Indcondo Building Corp. v. Sloan, 2014 ONSC 4018 (Ont. S.C.J.) at paragraph 52,badges of fraud are listed and include grossly inadequate consideration, embarking on ahazardous venture and a close relationship between the parties, all of which exist in thecase before me. I was not referred to any evidence of the defendants explaining thecircumstances surrounding the transfer of the Spillsbury property.

[23]

Although the plaintiff’s investments with Synergy were after the date of transfer of theSpillsbury property, if there was an intention to defeat creditors, it does not matter if theintention was to defeat present or future creditors (Indcondo at paragraph 48).

[24]

In my view, the plaintiff has satisfied his onus with respect to the Spillsbury propertyregardless of which line of authority is applied. There is sufficient evidence before me toestablish a prima facie case of fraud and sufficient evidence upon which a trial Judgecould conclude that the transfer of the Spillsbury property was made with the intention todefeat creditors and for no real consideration. The action as it relates to the Spillsburyproperty has a high chance of success and the balance of convenience favours thegranting of leave to issue a CPL. Leave is accordingly granted to issue a CPL withrespect to the Spillsbury property.
The Wispi Property

[25]

The Wispi property was purchased by the defendant Nadine Smith on July 26, 2005. Thedefendants Shane Smith and Nadine Smith reside at the Wispi property as theirmatrimonial residence.

[26]

The defendant Shane Smith was never on title on the Wispi property, although his namehad been on the Transfer/Deed of Land and was crossed out prior to registration. There isno registered transfer from Shane Smith to Nadine Smith.

[19]

As noted above, on February 26, 2016, a mortgage in the amount of $750,000 wasregistered on the Wispi property in favour of Sereda & Sereda. It is the defendants’
position that the mortgage was registered to secure Mr. Sereda’s legal fees. The motionfor a CPL on the Wispi property was served on or about February 23, 2016. There isevidence before me that the mortgage had been in discussion since August 18, 2015, andthat the defendant Nadine Smith had obtained independent legal advice concerning themortgage on February 19, 2016. The mortgage was not registered until 6 months after itwas first discussed and after service of the motion for a CPL.

[28]

There is evidence before me concerning a discussion between counsel on February 26,2016, while waiting for the “walk in” motion to be reached. It is Mr. Sereda’s evidencethat he specifically told Mr. Radnoff that the defendants had signed a mortgage to securehis fees, that the mortgage was in the process of registration and that he did not knowexactly when registration would take place. It is Mr. Radnoff’s evidence that Mr. Seredatold him he intended to register a mortgage at a later date and Mr. Sereda asked that themotion be adjourned. It is Mr. Radnoff’s evidence that he advised Mr. Sereda that theplaintiff would not agree to any mortgage for legal fees to be registered prior toregistration of the CPL. Mr. Radnoff’s evidence is that at no time did Mr. Sereda mentionwhile they were in court that Mr. Sereda was in the process of registering a $750,000.
mortgage. Mr. Radnoff deposes that had he known about the mortgage when he was incourt, Mr. Radnoff would have objected to the registration of the mortgage and asked foran order that Mr. Sereda be prevented from registering the mortgage. It is not the court’srole on an interlocutory motion for a CPL to assess credibility or decide disputed issuesof fact.

[29]

In addition to relying on allegations of fraudulent conveyances, the plaintiff also allegesthat Shane Smith is an equal owner of the Wispi property on the basis of a resultingand/or constructive trust. The plaintiff seeks a tracing of funds advanced to purchase theWispi property. It is alleged that the Wispi property was purchased from funds that thedefendants unlawfully received from the tax scheme. In this regard, the plaintiff relies onthe decision of Cambone v. Okoakih, 2016 ONSC 792 (Ont. S.C.J.). As stated by JusticeGray in Cambone at paragraphs 172-174:
Where the money to purchase an asset is furnished by one person, but the asset isplaced in the name of another, the doctrines of resulting trust and constructivetrust come into play.
Resulting trusts can arise in a number of ways, but of relevance here is where anasset is purchased by one person and is placed in the name of another. In thatsituation, it is presumed that the recipient holds his or her interest in trust for theperson who purchased the asset and provided the funds for it, unless it wasintended that there be a gift. The onus is on the recipient to prove the intentionwas to make a gift. Where there is more than one contributor to the purchaseprice, it is presumed that the trust is in favour of all of them. See Water’s Law ofTrusts in Canada, (4th Ed., Carswell, 2012), chapter 10, pp. 394-475.

[27]

[30]

There is a triable issue with respect to the source of funds to purchase the Wispi property.
The Wispi property was purchased for $425,000.00. On this motion it is the defendants’
evidence that mortgage funds in the amount of $390,000.00 were advanced by themortgagee 1427805 Ontario Inc. on closing. In another court proceeding, KheenInvestment Ltd. v. Smith, 2016 ONSC 3998 (Ont. S.C.J.) the Smiths took the position thatno monies were advanced by 1427805 Ontario Inc. There is evidence before me that1427805 Ontario Inc. had the same registered head office as Synergy. I was not referredto evidence concerning the source of the balance of the funds to purchase the Wispiproperty.

[31]

Having regard to the record before me there is sufficient evidence before me to allow meto conclude that there is a triable issue with respect to an interest in the Spillsburyproperty on the basis of a resulting and/or constructive trust. I am satisfied that adeclaration of a constructive and/or resulting trust and a tracing of funds are possibleremedies at trial. Leave is accordingly granted to issue a CPL with respect to the Wispiproperty. In these circumstances it is not necessary for me to also determine whether thetest for granting a CPL on the Wispi property has also been met on the further basis ofalleged fraudulent conveyances by way of transfer and or mortgage.

Costs

[32]

If any party seeks costs and if after reasonable attempts to agree on costs the parties areunable to agree, the parties may make arrangements to return before me to speak to theissue of costs by scheduling a re-attendance on a mutually convenient date to the parties,counsel and the court through the motions scheduling unit. Any re-attendance shall bescheduled, not necessarily heard, within 60 days of today’s date.

Order

[33]

Order to go as follows:
1. Leave is granted to amend the statement of claim in the form of the draft amendedstatement of claim attached to the letter from plaintiff’s counsel dated February23, 2017;2. Leave is granted to issue a CPL on the properties.
I have signed an order accordingly.

A constructive trust can also arise in a number of ways, but fundamentally it hasbeen applied to prevent unjust enrichment, which arises where there has beenenrichment of one party; corresponding deprivation to another; and no juristicreason for the enrichment and corresponding deprivation: see Waters, at pp. 534540.

Master B. McAfee

Date: May 19, 2017

