CITATION: Zubaid-Ahmed v. Butt, 2017 ONSC 3156
COURT FILE NO.: FS-16-88011-00
DATE: 20170523
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE – ONTARIO
Ifrah Zubaid-Ahmad, Applicant

RE:

AND:
Hasham Zahoor Butt, RespondentBEFORE:

Ricchetti, J.

COUNSEL: F. Rashid, Counsel for the Applicant (Mother)
L. Mongillo, Counsel for the Respondent (Father)
HEARD:

May 15, 2017

INTERIM ACCESS
THE MOTIONS

[1]

This court advised the parties it would hear the motions despite the fact that a case

conference had not been held.

The Father was exercising self-help. The Mother was denying

parenting time because of the Father's actions. It was clear that urgent issues had arisen resultingin a conflict regarding access thereby impacting the child of the marriage.

The issue of the

Father's parenting time had the potential to get out of hand.

[2]

Accordingly, the motions were adjourned for one day to permit the parties to make

submissions regarding an interim access order for the child of the marriage, ZakariyaMohammad Hasham-Butt (d.o.b. February 8, 2016) ("Zaki"). The custody issue is not urgent andwill have to be dealt with after the case conference.

2

[3]

The Mother's motion seeks temporary custody of Zaki and that the Father have access

[4]

The Father's motion seeks access with Zaki on every Thursday 9 am to Friday 3 pm and

every Sunday 9 am to Monday 7 pm.

[5]

In essence, the dispute is whether Zaki will spend Thursday nights and Friday mornings

with the Father.

The Father seeks more parenting time and submits this increase will permit him

to take Zaki to Friday prayers.

BACKGROUND

[6]

The Parties were married on August 3, 2014. The Parties separated on October 4, 2016.

Zaki is 15 months old.

[7]

The Mother commenced this application on November 30, 2016.

[8]

Both parties are professionally trained accountants.

They are both presently working full

time and make approximately the same annual income (but no updated Financial Statementswere produced on the motions). Both parties are able to work flex hours to accommodate theirrespective parenting time.

[9]

After separation, the parties could not agree upon a schedule for Zaki's care. The Father

had little parenting time with Zaki because of the Mother's position.

[10]

Lawyers were retained.

While both lawyers acted professionally and made numerous

bona fide attempts to resolve issues, as sometimes happens, the parties appear to have become

with Zaki every Thursday 9 am to 7 pm and every Sunday from 9am to Monday 7 pm.

3
adversarial when confronted with the legal claims of the other.

The difficulty with this

[11]

Much of the correspondence between counsel is self-serving, based on statements made

by the parties to counsel and, therefore, cannot be relied on to any significant extent. However,it is clear from the correspondent that the Mother appeared resistant to the Father having moreparenting time, particularly overnight time, and the Father appeared insistent on more parentingtime.

[12]

The parties attended a four way meeting in January 2017. The Father wanted equal

parenting time with Zaki.

This was not acceptable to the Mother. The parties agreed to the

following schedule for the Father’s parenting time:
a) every Thursday from 9 am to 7 pm; andb) every Sunday 9 am to Mondays at 7 pm.

[13]

At the four way meeting, the parties discussed a review in March 2017. Whether this

was an agreement to review matters is not relevant to this decision. What is clear is that therewas a discussion that the agreed upon parenting schedule for the Father would not be permanent.
This court agrees with the Mother that there was no assurance the Father's parenting time wouldbe increased in March 2017.

[14]

The January parenting schedule worked well for a short period of time.

In February,

2017 the Father requested a second overnight parenting time. In early March, 2017, the Mother

adversarial state is that it carried over to the issue of parenting time.

4
responded by suggesting a reduction in the Father's parenting time because the Father had

[15]

In March 2017, when the Father learned the Mother had also returned to work, the Father

renewed his demand for more parenting time with Zaki. The Mother wanted the Father’sparenting time to continue in accordance with the January 2017 parenting schedule. The disputecontinued.

[16]

In an attempt to resolve the issue, the parties attended a mediation on May 3, 2017. The

respective positions did not change.

[17]

The Father was frustrated and began to exercise self-help by not complying with the

January 2017 schedule. This was not a prudent or an acceptable course of conduct by the Fatherin the midst of this litigation, particularly where both parties were represented by counsel.

[18]

The "lawyer's letters" began to flow - setting out each parties' respective positions.

[19]

These motions became necessary to deal with the dispute.

THE LAW

[20]

Section 16 of the Divorce Act provides as follows:
16 (1) A court of competent jurisdiction may, on application by either or both spouses or by any otherperson, make an order respecting the custody of or the access to, or the custody of and access to, any or allchildren of the marriage.
(2) Where an application is made under subsection (1), the court may, on application by either or bothspouses or by any other person, make an interim order respecting the custody of or the access to, or thecustody of and access to, any or all children of the marriage pending determination of the application undersubsection (1).
…

returned to work.

5
(4) The court may make an order under this section granting custody of, or access to, any or all children ofthe marriage to any one or more persons.

(6) The court may make an order under this section for a definite or indefinite period or until the happeningof a specified event and may impose such other terms, conditions or restrictions in connection therewith asit thinks fit and just.

…
(8) In making an order under this section, the court shall take into consideration only the best interests ofthe child of the marriage as determined by reference to the condition, means, needs and othercircumstances of the child.
(9) In making an order under this section, the court shall not take into consideration the past conduct of anyperson unless the conduct is relevant to the ability of that person to act as a parent of a child.
(10) In making an order under this section, the court shall give effect to the principle that a child of themarriage should have as much contact with each spouse as is consistent with the best interests of thechild and, for that purpose, shall take into consideration the willingness of the person for whom custody issought to facilitate such contact.

(emphasis added)

THE ANALYSIS

[21]

The Father submits that s. 16(10) of the Divorce Act supports increasing his parenting

time because it is in Zaki’s best interests to have as much contact with each parent.

[22]

The Mother submits that Zaki is breast feeding. Therefore, parenting time for the Father

should not be increased as it is not be in Zaki’s best interests at this time.

[23]

For the reasons set out below, parenting time for the Father should be increased as it is in

Zaki's best interests to do so.

[24]

Let me deal with the issues raised by the Mother.

…

6

BREAST FEEDING
There is no dispute that breastfeeding a young child has physical and psychological

benefits.

Where the child is breastfeeding, this is a significant factor to be considered when

determining respective parenting time.

[26]

In this case, this court is not persuaded that breast feeding is ongoing, significant or

materially affects the amount of parenting time the Father should have. The following leads meto this conclusion:
a) The Father has had care of Zaki from Sunday mornings to Monday nights for about 45 months. The total time for each such period is almost 1 ½ day. This lengthy periodof parenting time was with the consent of the Mother.

There appeared to be no issue

by the Mother regarding breast feeding for this extended overnight period of timeonce a week.

Now that the Father seeks a second overnight parenting time, the

Mother suggests that twice a week would not be in Zaki’s best interests because itwould interfere with Zaki's breast feeding.

This court fails to see how a further

overnight would disrupt Zaki's breast feeding when one overnight does not;b) During the Father’s current parenting time, the Mother did not provide the Father anybreast milk to feed Zaki while he was in the Father's care.

The Mother admits she

stopped sending breast milk with Zaki for his feedings while in the Father’s care inJanuary 2017.

This suggests that breast feeding is not significant an issue for Zaki’s

nutrition at this time;

[25]

7
c) The Mother states she doesn't know what the Father has been feeding Zaki while inhis care.

This court does not accept the Mother’s submission given that she didn’t

months? To now use breast feeding as a reason to prevent further parenting time tothe Father makes little sense;d) From the Mother’s own evidence, the Mother has been feeding Zaki solid foods atleast since August 2016 including avocado, carrots, rice, crackers, naan and frenchfries. Zaki was already drinking from a "Zippi" cup.

It is difficult to imagine that

Zaki can eat these solid foods and that breast feeding would, if it is ongoing, wouldrequire the Father to have reduced parenting time;e) The Mother says at paragraph 42 of her affidavit that she stopped breast feeding twomonths ago;f) The Mother wants this court to rely on a March 21, 2017 letter from the Mother'sdoctor to show separation anxiety (I will come to that later). The same doctor's letterstates that the Mother has been "trying to breastfeed her child, but her milk supply isdiminishing. Despite pumping on a regular basis, she is not able to produce ahealthy amount of breast milk."

Of note, there was no update from this doctor

suggesting that the Mother's ability to breast feed has resumed;g) The Father states that Zaki has been feeding on cow's milk since "before Zaki wasone year old" and has been supplemented with baby formula from very early on. Thisis consistent with a text message from the Mother that Zaki was feeding on baby

believe breast milk was needed for overnight parenting time for the past 4 plus

8
formula in 2016. The Mother’s statement that Zaki only drinks breast milk is simply

[27]

The Mother also seeks to rely on a letter of a social worker, Ms. Varano. Ms. Varano

first met the Mother on May 9, 2017. The Mother expressed her concerns regarding a proposedplan that the Father have 50% parenting time while the Mother is "breastfeeding regularly". Ms.Varano did not conduct an assessment but sought to provide her observations andrecommendations to assist the parties to develop a child-focussed parenting plan in the bestinterests of the child.

On May 10, 2017 Ms. Varano attended at the Mother's home. Besides

repeating in Ms. Varano's letter what the Mother told Ms. Varano, the primary observation wasthat Zaki was "clingy" and the Mother nursed twice for 2-3 minutes. Given the short time Ms.Varano was involved, only hearing the Mother's version of the events, not seeing Zaki afterreturning from the Father's parenting time, not seeing Zaki with the Father, not having theevidence on this motion regarding the highly questionable "breast feeding", Ms. Varano's letterdoes not assist in deciding what the appropriate parenting time is for the Father. What is acceptedfrom Ms. Varano is that the parties need to focus on Zaki's needs versus their own and theparents need to develop "a child-focused parenting plan that is in the best interest of the child".

[28]

In summary, there is considerable evidence, mostly from the Mother but also from the

Father, that the Mother either no longer breast feeds or the breast feeding is minimal at this time.
The evidence on this motion favours the Father's position that any nursing is simply forcomforting Zaki, not for nutritional or feeding purposes.
on the amount of the Father’s parenting time with Zaki.

In either case, this would not impact

not true.

9

[29]

The Mother is not being candid about the breast feeding needs of Zaki and is using this

alleged breastfeeding as a tool to deny the Father greater parenting time.

There are simply too

ZAKI IS DISTRESSED AFTER VISITING WITH HER FATHER

[30]

This court finds the "statement" by the Mother that Zaki is distressed or exhibiting

anxiety after being with the Father is self-serving and without any evidentiary support.
15 months.

Zaki is

The Mother’s observations and conclusion that Zaki, a 15-month-old baby, is

suffering anxiety or separation stress when away from her is simply not believable.

[31]

The Mother points to the same doctor's letter referred to above. The difficulty with this

letter is that the doctor first met the Mother and Zaki on February 28, 2017 and wrote thisopinion on March 21, 2017. What the doctor observed and what he was told by the Mother isnot set out in the letter. Whether the doctor ever observed Zaki after he returned to the Motherfrom the Father’s care is not known.

Whether the doctor is a paediatrician is unknown.

There

are simply too many variables to put any significant weight on this letter from the doctor.

[32]

The Father's states that, after spending a day and overnight with him, Zaki begins to cry

when the Father starts to leave Zaki with his mother. This is reasonable and expected of a youngbaby when being taken away from the parent that he has just spent considerable time with.

THE STATUS QUO

[33]

The Mother points to a status quo. This court is not persuaded that one exists.

For a

brief period in January and early February 2017, the January 2017 parenting schedule was

many inconsistencies in the evidence to conclude otherwise.

10
adhered to. After that, there was no agreement on parenting time. The Father wanted more. The

[34]

This court is not persuaded that there is any status quo which impacts on its

determination of parenting time.

WHAT IS IN ZAKI'S BEST INTERESTS?

[35]

Both parties love Zaki and want to spend the maximum parenting time with him.

To

some extent both parties put their interests and needs ahead of Zaki's interests.

[36]
home.

Up until separation in October 2016, the Mother and Zaki lived at the Father's parents’
The Father has set out the extensive list of extended family members who will assist with

caregiving for Zaki. The Father's parents were home and had significant involvement in Zaki'scare and upbringing.

The Mother’s proposed parenting time reduces the benefit to Zaki of this

continued care from the Father's family. The numerous affidavits from Zaki's paternalgrandparents, aunts and uncles set out their roles in caring for Zaki from the birth until separationand during the Father's parenting time. While some of the statements made in their affidavits areclearly subject to a bias in favour of the Father, it is clear that Zaki has many family members onthe Father's side that care deeply about him and are prepared to assist in caring for Zaki when inthe Father's care.

[37]

The Mother has not set out in her Affidavit in Support of a Claim for Custody or Access

other family members who have or will be involved in the caregiving for Zaki.

Mother wanted to cut back or keep the same schedule.

11

[38]

This court is of the view that it would be in Zaki’s best interests to spend more parenting

[39]

In addition, the Father will be able to take Zaki to Friday prayers which is important to

the Father for Zaki's upbringing. I see no reason this cannot and should not be accommodated.

[40]

This additional parenting time for the Father would also result in a greater and stronger

relationship between Zaki and his Father, one of the factors this court is mandated to consider.

[41]

I am satisfied that the Father's proposed parenting time is in Zaki's best interests.

[42]

Given that an assessment has been order, the parenting time for the Father should be

subject to a further review after the assessment is completed but with an outside date in case theassessment report is delayed.

SECTION 30 CLRA ASSESSMENT

[43]

The parties agree to a s. 30 Children's Law Reform Act assessment by Tracy Majewski,

provided that Ms. Majewski consents to act, failing which, the parties shall agree on anotherqualified assessor who is prepared to undertake the assessment. So ordered.

[44]

The parties disagree on who should fund the assessment.

The Mother suggests the

Father should pay for the assessment. The Father suggests that the costs of the assessment bedivided equally between the parties.

[45]

I am not persuaded that the Father should bear the costs alone. Both parties are working

full time. They make approximately the same amount of money. The Mother was on maternity

time with his Father and his Father’s family.

12
leave until February 2017 but she was receiving maternity benefits (although likely at asubstantial lower amount than her income). However, the Mother's income has now returned to

November 30, 2016 Financial Statement, the expenses simply cannot be believed, furtherunderscoring the issues regarding the Mother's credibility.

[46]

At this point, I am satisfied that both parties can financially afford to equally share the

costs of the assessment. So ordered.

CONCLUSION

[47]

The Father shall have parenting time with Zaki as follows:
a) Every Thursday 9 am to Friday 3 pm; andb) Every Sunday 9 am to Monday 7 pm.

[48]

The exchanges shall take place at the Applicant's residence.

[49]

Either party may seek to vary this interim order: on demonstrating that it is an emergency

situation requiring a change to the interim parenting time or on the earlier of 30 days after therelease of the s. 30 assessment or 6 months from today's date. Until such time as a further orderis issued or there is written consent signed by both parties, the parties shall strictly comply withthe above parenting time.

[50]

A s. 30 assessment is hereby ordered on the terms set out above, with the costs of the

assessment to be equally paid by the parties.

prior levels (previously $73,501). She has some savings. As for her expenses, as shown on her

13

[51]

I have each party's Cost Outline.

[52]

Any party seeking costs shall serve and file written submission on entitlement and

quantum within two weeks of the release of these reasons. Written submissions shall be limitedto three pages, with attached Costs Outline, any offers and any authorities.

[53]

Any responding party shall have one week thereafter to serve and file responding

submissions.

Written submissions shall be limited to three pages with any authorities relied on

and any offers attached.

[54]

There shall be no reply submissions without leave.

Ricchetti J.
Date: May 23, 2017

COSTS

14

CITATION: Zubaid-Ahmed v. Butt, 2017 ONSC 3156
COURT FILE NO.: FS-16-88011-00
DATE: 20170523

ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
Ifrah Zubaid-AhmadApplicantAND:
Hasham Zahoor ButtRespondentINTERIM ACCESS
Ricchetti J.
Released: May 23, 2017

